The plan makes no provisions for continuing the cleanup beyondmid-September, and notes that 191 miles of lightly oiled coastlinemay not be cleaned mechanically at all, but be allowed to be washednaturally by the environment.
``It is expected that this will be the case for all lightlyoiled Gulf of Alaska sites,'' said the two-part, 60-page report.
The oil company's strategy, which was submitted to state andfederal authorities only hours before a deadline expired, dividesAlaska's oil-tainted shores into four categories _ from the mostheavily polluted to those that are ``only lightly oiled.''
It covers polluted areas within Prince William Sound, as well asthose outside the immediate spill zone, and calls for nearly 3,400workers to participate in the cleanup.
Exxon's plan calls for the recovered waste to be strained forusable oil that can be refined, and said the oil-laced wastewatercould be treated at the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co.'s disposalplant in Valdez.
The gunk and sludge that resists treatment or salvage will beburned or buried, according to the Exxon study.
Coast Guard Adm. Paul A. Yost Jr., the ranking federal officialtracking the cleanup, told reporters in Sacramento, Calif. that hewould decide whether to approve the proposal within a week.
Meanwhile, tar and sludge from the Valdez spill fouled thebeaches of Alaska's wild Katmai National Park, drenching hundredsof sea otters and birds and threatening the huge brown bearsprowling the refuge.
The oil has had an impact onvirtually the entire coastline of the park,'' Bane said.
The 4 million-acre park also is a haven for brown bears, acoastal cousin of the grizzly.
``A number of bears have been seenwalking in the vicinity of the beaches.
Bane said an aerial survey showed an amorphous oil patch 10miles wide and more than 20 miles long in the Shelikof Strait,which is located along the migration route used by whales.
Exxon is feeling the effects of the spill far beyond Alaskawaters.
The attorneys general of Idaho, Oregon and Washington statescheduled a news conference Tuesday to call for a federalinvestigation into the sharp rise in the price of gasoline sincethe spill.
The oil industry blames the spill and crude oil prices that haverisen $7 a barrel since January for higher prices at the gas pumps.
Exxon also received sharp criticism from the federal government,which accused the company of ``foot-dragging'' in the constructionof a second facility in Seward to aid in the cleanup of sea ottersfouled by the oil.
The animals depend on their thick fur forinsulation against the cold water but the oil ruins the insulationeffect.
