Introduction:MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Friday nights used to be slow at TheFault Line, a nightclub here on busy Poplar Avenue.
But afterword spread that a major earthquake was forecast for Dec. 3in the Midwest, The Fault Line began throwing earthquakeparties.
On Friday nights now, hundreds of patrons pour into theclub to swig "Earthquake shooters" and sign up to win Dec. 3Earthquake Escape Packages to the Bahamas or Hot Springs,Ark.
But even as Memphians whoop it up, the prediction that theBig One may come in December is triggering tremors up anddown the Mississippi Valley.
In Missouri and Arkansas, some schools and businesses haveannounced plans to close in early December.
But it seems stupid tostay on a fault line with a prediction like this.
But the Midwest actually has had three of the most powerfulearthquakes on this continent.
In 1811 and 1812, along a120-mile zig-zag formation called the New Madrid fault, aseries of quakes ravaged the Midwest.
And as tons of soil and rock bed pitched androlled in a seismic frenzy, new waterfalls spiked up, causingpart of the mighty Mississippi River to flow backward forseveral hours.
The New Madrid (pronounced MAD-rid) fault still has 150small, mostly unfelt, earthquakes a year.
In the next 10years, experts warn, the area has a 33% chance of a quakemeasuring 7.1.
Over the years, a few pinpoint-on-the map towns have triedto capitalize on the little-known fault.
That's because the predictor hasgained credibility in some important circles for his work onthe climate.
Iben Browning, a 72-year-old scientist, predictedOctober's Bay Area quake a week before it happened, saypeople who heard him speak to the Equipment ManufacturersInstitute.
And he predicted "geological danger" on Sept. 19,1985, along a band of latitude that included Mexico City --where a massive quake struck on that day.
Mr. Browning, who has a Ph.D. in physiology, genetics andbacteriology, writes a climate newsletter out of New Mexico.
He has clients, such as PaineWebber Inc., who have long paidfor his wisdom on how the weather will affect theiragricultural investments.
Since 1971, Mr. Browning says, he has picked the correctdates of four large earthquakes, two volcanoes -- and one daywith both a volcano and an earthquake.
He bases his forecasts on tidal forces caused by thepositions of the sun and the moon -- an old theory, criticssay, that doesn't wash. On Dec. 3, those forces are expectedto be at a 27-year high.
Mr. Browning says that will exertpressure that could trigger faults already ripe to fail.
The New Madrid area has a 50-50 chance of producing atleast a 7 quake on Dec. 3, give or take a day or two oneither side, Mr. Browning says.
At that time, a similar quakehas a lesser chance of occurring on California's San Andreasor Hayward faults, according to Mr. Browning, and an 8.2quake in Tokyo has a greater chance.
"No responsible scientist can predictan exact day for an earthquake," says Brian Mitchell, a quakeexpert at St. Louis University, echoing the majority opinion.
He has a methodology that candetermine, plus or minus a window of a day or two, anenhanced probability of a volcano or an earthquake in certainlatitudes," says Mr. Stewart.
"I feellike a lonely little petunia in a cabbage patch," he says.
But asked if he enjoys being right, he says, "It's the onlydamn thing that matters.
Salespeople from aMemphis company pop up at survival seminars with a device(for $259 and up) that turns off gas lines when a quake hits.
So many people plan to skip town on Dec. 3 that theFlexible Technologies tubing plant already plans to shut downfor two days, at a cost of thousands of dollars.
Says JimmyConnell, plant superintendent, "It's going to be a ghost townaround here.
"Robert Edwards, a Blytheville fireman who teaches seminarsin earthquake survival, has become a hot property.
It is 9 a.m.on a rainy Saturday, and 325 Osceolans, gripping legal padsand spiral notebooks, fill the high school auditorium for anall-day session on earthquake preparedness.
Andall the federal emergency help is going to go there and St. Louis.
You have to be prepared to take complete care ofyourself for 24 hours to two weeks.
Scared that the big Memphis-Arkansas bridge that spans theMississippi River will collapse in a quake, she's charting analternate route two hours out of her way.
Michael Prince, a child psychologist in Jonesboro, says heknows of 10 to 15 children, age four to nine, so unnervedthat they've reverted to bed-wetting or extreme anxiety aboutbeing separated from their parents.
Trying to calm the fear, the National EarthquakePrediction Evaluation Council, a panel of academic andgovernment seismic experts, will review the Browning claim ata meeting in a few weeks.
In 11 years of studying predictionmethods, the panel has found no bona fide approach.
The groupusually ignores claims that aren't scientifically documented(like the one by the California man who said his goldfishhelped him predict quakes).
"But this one," says Randall Updike, the executivesecretary, "has created such chaos in the mid-continentregion that we felt we had to give our advice."Mr.
Browning says he is tentatively booked to give a talkin Minneapolis on Dec. 3 and he doesn't plan to go there viaSt.
