However, Washington's proposals, promised by Mr Alexander Watson, assistantsecretary of state for inter-American affairs, are likely to disappointCaribbean basin governments which have been seeking a comprehensive packageto allow free access to the US and Canadian markets.
Claiming that a more competitive Mexico, with free access to the US andCanada, will capture markets which Caribbean basin countries have developedunder current trade agreements, the region has asked for 'parity' withMexico in exporting to Nafta signatories.
Some regional government officials and US legislators supportive of theCaribbean's concerns - which include the possible diversion of investmentsto Mexico - have now concluded that what would amount to a de factoextension of Nafta is unlikely.
The measures to be announced by the US are a result of discussions last yearbetween President Bill Clinton and leaders from the Caribbean and CentralAmerica.
Mr Clinton and his Mexican counterpart, Mr Carlos Salinas, assuredthe Caribbean basin countries that they would not be adversely affected bythe implementation of Nafta, and that efforts would be made to protect theirmarkets in the US and Canada.
What the Caribbean basin countries want is quick action by legislators inWashington, and then in Ottawa and Mexico City, to ratify proposals by someUS congressmen to put all the region's exports to the US and Canada on a parwith Mexico's.
While willing togive parity to a few products, the US wanted the Caribbean basin countriesto meet new conditions, including bilateral investment treaties,intellectual property rights agreements, workers' rights and environmentallegislation, democracy, good governance and accountability, Mr Carringtonsaid.
'In presenting their case for parity, Caribbean leaders have argued that theUS and Canada will also be the losers if there is extensive economicdislocation in the region caused by a loss of markets to Mexico.
In the past 10 years US exports to the Caribbean basin havedoubled, making the region the tenth largest market for US exporters.
'Currently 60 cents of every dollar earned by the Caribbean returns to theUS through the purchase of US goods, compared with only 10 cents for eachdollar spent by Asia.
'Without improved access to the US and Canadian markets to counter Mexico'sbenefits under Nafta, the Caribbean basin countries will have to continuedepending on their current trade preference agreements with the US andCanada.
