Introduction: A stone's throw from the smelly Smithfield meatmarket is an office building complex with no sign or anything toattract the attention of Londoners hurrying by.
This is the Central Selling Organization, London-based marketingarm of the De Beers diamond empire, controlled by the wealthyOppenheimer family of South Africa.
But scratch the surface of this secretive world, and the diamondbusiness loses some sparkle.
Sales have declined sharply, and the 56-year-old cartel isfacing pressure to give producers better terms and allow them tosell more of their own gems.
Although its prosperity and control of the world diamondindustry looks unchallengeable, the pressures could loosen its gripand crimp its profits.
De Beers' South African interests face an uncertain future,largely because of a newly energized political will by the blackmajority in that country, an important diamond producer.
After growth spurts of 19 percent in 1987 and 35 percent in1988, rough diamond sales fell 2 percent to $4.09 billion last yearbecause of slowing economies, high interest rates and theorganization's two double-digit price increases in 1988 and 1989.
The decline was sharpest in the second half of the year, whensales fell 24 percent from the first six months.
The organization must this year renegotiate five-year contractswith Botswana, the second biggest diamond producer in terms ofvalue, and Argyle Diamonds of Western Australia, the biggestproducer in terms of quantity.
The government of newly independent Namibia, meanwhile, isexpected to demand a one-fifth stake in Consolidated Diamond Mines,De Beers' Namibian subsidiary.
The organization sells most of the Soviet Union's West-bounddiamonds, but the Soviets, the biggest value producer, have beenacting more independently and squeezing the cartel's margins, theexperts say.
Jack Lunzer, managing director of IDC Ltd., an independentdiamond distributor in London, said De Beers undoubtedly willcontinue to control the major part of world production, but itsmarketing arm's profits will fall.
The effect hasn't been felt yet; De Beers' profit rose 37percent to $1.1 billion in 1989.
Few diamond-producing countries dare sell their output outsidethe organization, and some bold enough to leave have returnedbecause of the difficulty in peddling diamonds alone.
``We are as strongly in control of the diamond market as we havebeen for many years,'' said Tim Capon, the cartel's director.
The organization buys rough diamonds from De Beers' own mines,which represent 30 percent of world production, and from producersin Tanzania, South Africa, Zaire, Botswana, Namibia, Australia andthe Soviet Union.
Ten times a year, at sales called ``sights,'' the clientsare offered a selection of diamonds chosen by the organization andplaced in a simple cardboard box.
The gems then go to cutters in the world's major diamond-cuttingcenters: Bombay, India; Tel Aviv, Israel; Antwerp, Belgium; and NewYork.
Of all diamonds mined, only 15 percent will end up in jewelry,but these represent 80 percent of the value of the world's diamondproduction.
The organization is fighting the lackluster sales trend bytrying to create new demand.
Today, diamonds remain ``the gem of gems,'' althoughmillions of people own them.
De Beers insists it seeks long-term stability and prosperity forthe industry, saying price fluctuations would undermine confidencein the value of diamonds.
Even its fiercest competitors laud De Beers for putting upconsiderable amounts of money and assuming the risks to developmines and support the market.
During the early 1980s, when high interest rates caused theworst diamond slump since the 1930s, the organization prevented themarket's collapse by doubling its diamond stockpile to nearly $2billion worth.
Said Lunzer: `` It's not unnatural for people in the producingcountries to say, `Are we getting a proper share of the value ofour national resource?'''
Formally known as De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., and based inKimberley, South Africa, the company was formed in 1888 by theBritish industrial colonialist Cecil Rhodes.
Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, a diamond merchant, became chairman ofDe Beers in 1929 and five years later formed Diamond Trading Co.,the precursor of today's cartel.
Oppenheimer, who linked the diamond business with his extensiveAnglo American Corp. gold-mining interests, is credited withsteering De Beers through the Depression.
He died in 1957 and wassucceeded by his son, Harry Oppenheimer, who has made the companymore internationally minded and therefore less vulnerable.
