But a unique subset has formed: people who like to do both at the sametime.
"A runner should be able to enjoy a closed city for a day.
It's a celebration for the sport as much as a competition.
Inaddition to air fare and hotel, runners are guaranteed spots in restrictedentry races such as the London Marathon.
London, the most popular European city to visit, holds the world's largestmarathon (April 12 next year).
"Most marathons take you through cities, so you geta chance to see things you'd never see on a sightseeing bus," said Fred Lebow,president of the New York Roadrunner's Club and director of the New YorkMarathon.
"The most exciting thing is the startof the race," he said.
"The cities aredifferent, but most marathons include a carbo-loading pasta party the nightbefore, medical exams, a post-race celebration, commemorative T-shirts andawards to finishers.
The price includes round-trip airfare, four days and three nights at the Grotto Bay Beach hotel (per person,based on double occupancy), full breakfasts and dinners, a welcome cocktailparty and post-race parties and discounts.
England has similarorganizations: Sports Tours International and Keith Prowse, a company thatspecializes in British theater, sports and concert tours.
But it isn'tnecessary to run 26.2 miles to go on a running vacation, especially if it's afamily trip.
Some marathons, like Portland's, include additional races: afive-mile run, a five-mile walk and a kids run.
Budapest offers a half-marathon and a mini-marathon along theDanube.
Running coach Pat Savage and Hal Higdon, a senior writer forRunner's World, are taking a group to Ireland in June.
The eight-day trip willleave from Chicago and will include sightseeing, guided runs and a fun runfrom Malahide Castle to Swords.
The Munich course is the same as the 1972 Olympic route and finishesin the same stadium.
Running 26 miles just to see a city definitely isn'tfor everyone, but at the very least, it's a way to kill two birds with onestone.
In the recent Chicago Marathon, a German man ran with a camera,snapping photos every few miles.
IF YOU'RE INTERESTEDIf you're interestedin combining a vacation and marathon, here are some firms to contact:;   Marathon Tours, 108 Main St., Charlestown, Mass.
