Introduction: A major issue hanging over the 1990 Census isresolved with the decision to include military personnel stationedoverseas, but Congress is arguing over whether to keep countingillegal aliens.
The House blocked an effort Tuesday to require aliens to beexcluded from the census numbers used in House reapportionmentevery decade.
Censusfigures are used to redistribute the 435 House seats among thestates every 10 years and to distribute federal aid to localgovernments.
The reapportionment issue has riveted the attention of Housemembers from states where slow growth threatens to result in lossesof House seats.
Most of these states are in the North, where growthhas lagged behind that of the South and West.
Undocumented aliens are largely concentrated in the South, Westand industrial states like New York, and other states fear a lossof power to those areas if the aliens are counted.
The Commerce Department settled that problem by announcing itwill work with the Defense Department on ways to count the 1.2million to 1.6 million military and civilian defense workers wholive overseas.
That has yet to be decided, but possibilitiesinclude counting the state where the person owns a home or the laststate where he or she lived for at least six months.
Rep. Tom Ridge, R-Pa., unsuccessfully sought to attach a ban oncounting aliens to an appropriations measure providing $5.8 millionto run the State, Justice and Commerce departments next year,including $800 million to take the census.
The bill was approved258-165 and sent to the Senate.
Opponents noted the Constitution requires House seats to beapportioned based on all the ``persons'' residing in a state.
``Every census since the Constitution was created has countedall residents of the states, both citizens and non-citizens,''observed Rep. Don Edwards, D-Calif. ``Congress is empowered to identify those to be counted'' in thecensus, responded Ridge.
The Census Bureau's $4 billion budget forthe census is large enough to identify and separate out the illegalaliens, he said.
