Introduction:THERE are growing signs that Hurricane Andrew, unwelcome as it was for thedevastated inhabitants of Florida and Louisiana, may in the end do no harmto the re-election campaign of President George Bush.
After a faltering and heavily criticised initial response to the disaster,both the president and his administration seem finally to be gettingassistance to those rendered homeless and to businesses and farms that havebeen destroyed.
In the process, Mr Bush has been able to call on the power of incumbency,the one asset denied his presidential rival, Mr Bill Clinton, who is tovisit Florida today.
His poignant and brief address to the nation on Tuesday night, committingthe government to pay the emergency relief costs and calling on Americans tocontribute to the American Red Cross, also struck the right sort of note.
Itwas only his tenth such televised speech from the Oval Office, itself atestimony to the gravity of the situation.
As if to underline the political benefit to the president, a Harris pollconducted from August 26 to September 1 yesterday showed Mr Bush with 45 percent support - behind Mr Clinton by just five points - reflecting a closerrace than other recent surveys.
With Mr Bush constantly in the headlines, Mr Clinton has been left on thesidelines, able to do little more than offer sympathy and sotto vocecriticism of the president's initial stumbling.
However, the arrival in Florida of the military and the assignment ofspecial responsibilities to Mr Andrew Card, the young and telegenictransportation secretary, is making a difference.
It was Mr Baker who reshuffled the president's campaign schedule to makeroom for visits to the devastated areas and who pushed for a bigger role forthe previously obscure Mr Card.
Yesterday, Mr Bush flew to South Dakota to tell farmers of an expansion ofthe subsidised grains exports programme and then to the General Dynamicsfactory in Texas to announce an F-16 fighter sale to Taiwan.
This takes the insurancebill from the storm to around Dollars 8bn, making it the costliest disasterto hit the US.
