Introduction: The Maoist Shining Path guerrillas whodominate Peru's Upper Huallaga River Valley have brought their ownlaw and order to a cocaine-corrupted, violence-ridden region.
``Two years ago you could not travel the roads without being heldup, but the `companeros' put an end to that,'' said cab driver DavidNicolas, referring to the guerrillas by the Spanish term forcomrades.
``They killed a few bandits and the rest got the message.''
Much of the appeal of the rebels is rooted in their reputationfor almost puritanical honesty.
Shopkeepers say the guerrillas never fail to pay for the food andsupplies they acquire in the villages.
The same shopkeepers complainbitterly about the local police who take what they want without everoffering to pay.
In a rare conversation with reporters, a Shining Path politicalofficer, who spoke only on condition he not be identified, gave anexample of the kind of law the guerrillas have laid down: ``Do notsteal so much as a needle or thread and return what you borrow.''
In a nation where economic chaos reigns and few laws arerespected, the Shining Path is setting down clear rules and makingthem stick.
``In a sense they enforce a hyper-Christian morality _ exceptthey kill you if you break the rules,'' said the Rev.
In late July four young homosexual men who rendezvoused at abridge a few miles outside Tingo Maria, 35 miles south of here, wereset upon and killed by the rebels.
``People have had to discipline themselves,'' said Raul Aranda,an agronomist in Tingo Maria, explaining the effects of``revolutionary justice.''
Villagers say they are told, ``The revolution has a thousand eyesand a thousand ears.''
In the bleak Andean highlands, where the rebelslaunched their insurgency in May, 1980, they have slain thousands ofpeasants in attacks on villages they viewed as traitors to the rebelcause.
But here in the jungle-cloaked Upper Huallaga Valley, the world'slargest source of coca leaf, the Shining Path _ ``Sendero Luminoso''in Spanish _ enjoys the support of tens of thousands of farmersbecause the rebels protect them against a U.S.-funded cocaeradication program.
Although they prohibit drug consumption, the guerrillas defendcoca production as an important source of income for the peasants.
The rebels charge coca farmers a ``tax'' of 10 to 15 percent onthe earnings from the sale of their crops to drug traffickers, whoprocess the leaf into paste and sell it to Colombian cocainedealers.
The Colombians arrive in small planes at dozens ofclandestine airstrips throughout the 150-mile-long valley.
They say they feel protected from the violence of druggangs, corrupt local officials and ``abusive'' police.
For thecoca and for revenge,'' said Carlos Ferrer, a taxi driver whotravels the road between Tingo Maria and Aucayacu.
That view of the police as corrupt and abusive of their power iswidely held in the valley.
``A cop in the Huallaga Valley expects to be bribed,'' said asenior Interior Ministry official, speaking on condition ofanonymity.
A half dozen peasants complained in separate interviews that toobtain a farm loan from the local Banco Agrario they have to kickback 25 percent of the loan to bank officials.
The Shining Path has been quick to kill local officials theydeemed to be corrupt, according to residents of the valley.
``If the Shining Path has the image of an organization that'sfighting corruption in a very corrupt place, that's going to winthem some points,'' Feeley said.
