Introduction: Here is a chronology of the Exxon Valdez oil spill, its cleanupand related developments:   March 24: The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez runs aground on BlighReef some 25 miles south of Valdez, Alaska, spilling nearly 11million gallons of North Slope crude oil into Prince William Sound.
More than250 lawsuits will be filed against Exxon in the following months.
Oil now covers 1,000square miles, leaking out of the sound to foul beaches along theGulf of Alaska and Cook Inlet.
June 19: Exxon and other big oil companies announce plans for avoluntary network of response teams capable of handling big spillsanywhere in U.S. coastal waters.
Sept. 15: Exxon suspends its beach cleanup for the winter,claiming it has left 1,100 miles of oiled beaches ``environmentallystable'' and saying its 25-week cleanup involving more than 10,000workers was a job well done.
Oct. 27: The National Wildlife Federation says Exxon hasresigned from its corporate advisory board.
Exxon calls theconservation group unfair in its criticism of the oil spill; thegroup calls Exxon ``a corporate pariah.''
Nov. 8: The U.S. House of Representatives passes a billpreserving states' ability to adopt stricter oil spill liabilitylaws than the federal government.
Dec. 4: U.S. Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner saysExxon's cleanup has cost the company $1.9 billion, and praisesExxon for ``a very substantial, good-faith effort.''
Dec. 31: Wildlife officials report that more than 1,000 seaotters, 140 bald eagles and nearly 36,500 seabirds have been founddead in the spill area.
Jan. 5: The Alaska Oil Spill Commission issues a report callingfor an overhaul of the nation's oil transportation system.
Itblames the Valdez spill in part on the Coast Guard's ``undulyfriendly relationship with industry,'' and a reckless rush toprofits by the oil industry.
Feb. 20: The Coast Guard orders Exxon to resume its cleanup May1 and to submit a plan by March 15.
Feb. 27: A federal grand jury indicts Exxon and its shippingsubsidiary on five criminal counts.
Officials say that if convictedon all counts, the company could be fined up to $1.6 million andcould be assessed an additional $700 million in penalties.
March 22 _ Jury finds Hazelwood guilty of negligent discharge ofoil but innocent of the more serious charges.
