Introduction: At least four moderate earthquakes rattledparts of the world, but there was nary a tremor Monday along theNew Madrid Fault, where a scientist said a earthquake was likely tooccur.
Browning said there was a 50-50 chance for a major earthquakeearly this week along the fault, which stretches from Marked Tree,Ark., northeast through New Marid, Mo., to Cairo, Ill.
The center received more than 50 calls about the New Madridforecast Monday morning and hundreds last week, said Person, whobegan doing interviews for radio and television stations just aftermidnight.
A needle jumped a few inches across the seismograph connected tomonitoring equipment in Tonopah, Nev.
Person scanned the chart andcalled to a colleague, ``It may be a nuclear test.
With a measured eye, he estimated the quake was magnitude 2.5 to3.0 on the Richter scale.
Three were in the South Pacific, a 5.9-magnitude shakernear New Caledonia, and quakes of 5.1 and 5.0 in the area of Tonga.
The fourth was a 5.9-magnitude temblor in northern Colombia.
A quake of that size can cause considerable damage in apopulated area, but aren't considered serious in remote spots.
A quake of magnitude 2 is about the smallest felt byhumans.
An earthquake of 3.5 on the Richter scale can cause slightdamage in the local area, 4 moderate damage, 5 considerable damage,6 severe damage.
A 7 reading is a ``major'' earthquake, capable ofwidespread heavy damage; 8 is a ``great'' quake, capable oftremendous damage.
The big San Francisco Bay area quake last yearregistered 7.1 on the Richter scale.
In 1989, the earthquake center recorded 14,604 earthquakes, witha magnitude 1 or higher, Person said.
This fall, there have been two in the New Madrid Fault area,magnitude 4.6 on Sept. 26 and magnitude 3.5 on Nov. 9, which ``isnot unusual,'' he said.
Other quakes occur in a swarm over a periodof time, he said.
One woman called daily, alerting Person that an earthquake wasabout to occur, based on the number of birds that crossed herwindshield as she drove down the street.
