Introduction:   Supercomputers, satellites and the expertise ofseveral hurricane forecasters predicted the destructive pathHurricane Hugo would follow, giving people plenty of time to fleethe South Carolina coast.
Forecasters at the National Hurricane Center used computer modelsto track Hugo's path into Charleston, S.C.   ``All the world's knowledge about meteorological conditions andforecasting changes in those conditions is embodied in thosemodels,'' said Thomas Pyke, head of National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration's satellite service.
Pinpointing the exact point of Hugo's landfall was difficult, butforecasters said Friday that the landfall was predicted in time forevacuation.
The real forecasting problem with Hugo was predicting theintensity of the storm, which was upgraded to a Category 4 hurricanejust hours before it slammed into Charleston.
The hurricane specialists were surprised by the last-minuteincrease in wind speed, which was reported to them by Air Forcereconnaissance.
Information from the satellite isused to improve the accuracy of the large-scale models thattelevision viewers see every night.
Using the information from the satellite, supercomputers at theNational Meteorological Center in Suitland, Md., send information tothe hurricane center where a tracking model constantly changes toaccount for current weather conditions and the position of thehurricane.
To determine the track of the storm, the forecasters analyzesupercomputer predictions, satellite data, the history of similarstorms and the current path of the hurricane.
Meteorology professor Kerry A. Emmanuel of the MassachussettsInstitute of Technology criticizes the current forecasting system.
``Most of the information actually used to predict hurricanescomes from flying airplanes into the hurricane, and they do a verygood job,'' Emmanuel said.
``We have to remember that those models used are only guidanceproducts,'' Pyke said, ``and that it's ultimately the job of theforecaster to predict the storm's path.
