Introduction: The City Council today asked countyprosecutors to investigate the conduct of a white policeman who wassecretly filmed while he pushed an off-duty black policeman througha plate-glass window.
Don Jackson, said he set upthe self-styled ``sting'' in Long Beach to expose alleged policeracism in the Los Angeles area.
Now, it is brought to your living roomin living color,'' said Frank Berry, president of the Long Beachchapter of the National Association for the Advancement of ColoredPeople.
The police chief in Long Beach declined to comment pending aninvestigation.
Long Beach Mayor Ernie Kell said on NBC's ``Today'' show thismorning that he was disturbed by the videotape.
``I ... do not support racism or police brutality, nor do thevast majority of the citizens of Long Beach, and we're a caring,thinking community and it disturbed us very much to see the tape,''he said.
Jackson and a companion were driving through a high-crime area ofthe city when their car was pulled over and Jackson got out.
The NBC-TV videotape shows a white officer attempting to searchJackson.
The officer unleashed a stream of profanity and roughed upJackson after he demanded to know why he was being searched.
The incident renewed calls for a citizen board to review thePolice Department.
The idea first was debated last year amidallegations of police brutality.
But Jackson's boss said the black officer was looking for trouble.
``I submit that if Mr. Jackson had stayed in the vehicle, as didthe driver, this incident would not have occurred,'' HawthornePolice Chief Kenneth R. Stonebraker said at a news conference Monday.
Since the incident apparently was timed by Jackson to coincidewith the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. the confrontationshould be considered ``nothing short of timed sensationalism at therisk of serious injury to all of the parties involved,'' Stonebrakersaid.
``As a police chief,'' he added, ``I do not for one minutecondone the unlawful use of force or police brutality.''
The 30-year-old Jackson, who has been on a stress-relateddisability leave from his Hawthorne job for 22 months, contends theincident is typical of a pattern of racism by white officers in theLos Angeles area.
He has a disability lawsuit pending, has filedracism complaints against the department and conducted a similarpersonal sting operation against Los Angeles police.
Jackson got out after the car stopped and police approached.
Police booked Jackson for investigation of interfering withpolice and challenging a police officer.
``I had already had my hands up and was turned to the windowand he slammed my face in it.''
``I'm deeply concerned since it strikes me as a period whenpolice violence and excessive force is rampant,'' said MarkRidley-Thomas, executive director of the Southern ChristianLeadership Conference's Los Angeles chapter.
Jackson said he chose Long Beach police because of complaints tothe Police Misconduct Lawyer's Referral Service of Los Angeles.
David Lynn of the referral service said 50 misconduct complaintswere filed with his group against the Long Beach police.
