Introduction: Coast Guard Commandant Paul A. Yost onTuesday attacked Exxon's plan to clean up the Alaskan oil spill.
Yost, the top federal official tracking the environmentaldisaster, said Exxon's plan was poorly drafted and lacking inspecifics.
In Washington, consumer activist Ralph Nader said Exxon ``shouldnot be allowed to forget'' the spill and that a boycott would sendthe oil giant a message.
He and others blasted Exxon for failing to be prepared for thespill and not rapidly responding to the accident that fouledhundreds of miles of Alaska's coast.
``We are beginning the war of words and actions against any oilcompany that doesn't understand its responsibility to protect theenvironment,'' Massachusetts state Sen. Carol Amick told a boycottrally in Boston.
In Anchorage, about 400 chanting and sign-waving protestersrallied in front of Exxon's Alaskan headquarters to urge a consumerboycott.
J. Edward Surette Jr., executive director of the Bay StateGasoline Retailers Association in Billerica, Mass., said it was tooearly to assess the boycott's impact.
Exxon spokeswoman Sarah Johnson said 10,000 credit cards out of7 million have been cut up and returned to the company since thespill.
Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner, who is to make hissecond trip to Alaska on Wednesday as overall coordinator for thecleanup, said he expected the size of the operation to double ortriple by the end of the month.
In a speech at the National Press Club in Washington, Skinnercalled the spill ``the most significant environmental disaster thisnation has ever faced.''
However, he said the cleanup, to be paid for by the oilindustry, could add $100 million to $500 million to Alaska'seconomy, which he said is more than the effect of the fishingindustry.
Exxon released a statement that called the boycott unjust.
ExxonPresident William D. Stevens said the company was ``turning heavenand Earth to set things right.''
Exxon's 60-page, two-part revised strategy to cleanse some 364miles of Alaska's coastline of the oil spilled March 24 by thetanker Exxon Valdez was released Monday.
About 300 miles from the spill site, an observer saw thousandsof dead birds in a wide tidal basin in the Hallo Bay area.
State and federal officials said the focus of the cleanup ismoving southwest, following the drifting oil along the AlaskaPeninsula through the Shelikof Strait east of Kodiak Island.
The tanker is undergoing preliminary repairs in the sound, andis to be moved next month to Portland, Ore., home of the onlydrydock on the West Coast capable of handling the 987-foot ship.
In its proposal, Exxon said it wants to burn or bury the sludgerecovered in the cleanup, which may require exemptions from Alaskaenvironmental law.
But Bill Lamoreaux, the ranking state environmental officer atthe spill, said the laws would not be relaxed.
``The generalfeeling is that we would expect that they would comply with theenvironmental laws,'' Lamoreaux said.
Exxon's plan also notes that 191 miles of coastline it describesas ``lightly oiled'' may be left untouched to be cleansed naturallyby wind and water.
James Exon and Bob Kerrey, both Nebraska Democrats,called on U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to investigatepotential price gouging by the oil industry.
They noted that gasprices in Nebraska rose 20 percent from the first of March untilmid-April.
Since the Exxon Valdez accident, gas prices have increased anaverage 10 percent nationally, while the Northwest saw surges ashigh as 25 percent in less than a month, said Marla Rae, executiveassistant to Oregon Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer.
At a news conference in Houston, Exxon President Stevens said itshowed ``shocking naivete'' to blame the price hikes on his company.
``As you know,'' he told reporters, ``the market for petroleumproducts is set by thousands of markets, thousands of independentdealers across the nation.
