Introduction:IN BLOOD-RED letters, the sign on the front window of the Dealers Outlet gun store in suburban Phoenix declared: "Urgent!
Inside, customers took time out from browsing through AK-47 assault rifles and a flock of other firearms to sign a petition -- and to vent their wrath at a local "turncoat," U.S. Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.).
"We are petitioning to protest the semiautomatic gun-control bills before Congress," read the text above a fast-growing list of names.
"If we allow the government to become involved in any type of gun control, we are violating a basic constitutional right, the right to keep and bear arms."
The petitioners' target that sunny day last spring was DeConcini, a longtime opponent of gun-control measures who had suddenly switched sides, sponsoring one of the nine bills currently in Congress to ban the sale of assault weapons.
"I'm a one-issue voter, and I'm going to do everything in my power to take DeConcini out," George Hiers, a burly man on crutches, vowed as he bought a semiautomatic shotgun for his wife to defend herself with while he's away on hunting trips.
Long described as "the powerful gun lobby," the NRA is now scrambling to recover from stunning setbacks in the past three years.
Over the NRA's opposition, Congress and state legislatures have enacted legislation banning "cop-killer bullets" that penetrate protective vests, plastic guns that can be slipped past metal detectors and "Saturday night specials" that are used in many crimes.
And most recently, the group found itself caught in the furor over assault weapons that was ignited by the massacre of five children in a Stockton schoolyard last January.
Those killings, combined with the increasing use of the weapons by drug dealers and youth gangs, have exacerbated the contentious relations between the NRA and its former allies.
Politicians once fearful of the NRA have been much more willing to stand up to it; President Bush, an NRA "Life Member," on July 7 imposed a permanent ban on imports of assault rifles and has proposed limiting the semiautomatics' ammunition clips.
The ban so infuriated some NRA members that they have launched petition drives in two dozen states to oust Bush from the organization.
Meanwhile, California, whose voters only seven years ago defeated an initiative that would have frozen the number of handguns in the state, last May became the first state to ban assault weapons.
At the same time, gun-control organizations are beginning to match the NRA's mass mailings, ads and lobbying; many schools are showing "Guns and the Constitution," an anti-gun video produced by Handgun Control Inc., whose chairwoman is Sarah Brady, wife of former White House Press Secretary James Brady, who was disabled by gunfire in the 1981 assassination attempt on then-President Reagan.
And the NRA even is feeling pressure from more-militant gun groups that threaten to drain away members and funds.
Thus, in fending off the assaults on assault weapons, the 118-year-old NRA is facing what its leaders call its most daunting challenge.
"We're going to go down the road of either prohibitive firearms regulations or tough criminal justice provisions" -- that is, more prosecutors, penalties and prisons, the course sought by the NRA.
Aside from the nation's capital, two of the hottest battlegrounds in the assault-weapons fight are Arizona and Florida.
But with opinion polls in both states showing that large majorities of residents support bans -- and with police complaining about being outgunned by criminals -- legislators have moved into action, spurring angry counterattacks from the NRA.
AS PAT JONAS signed the petition in the gun store near Phoenix, one could witness the NRA's true political power: mobilizing citizens at the grass roots.
Probably no other organization in the world floods government officials with as many phone calls, letters, telegrams and visits from its members as the NRA.
Charles J. Orasin, president of 15-year-old Handgun Control -- the NRA's chief nemesis -- estimates that as many as 500,000 members of the NRA and other gun groups regularly lobby elected officials and bureaucrats.
The outpouring is prompted by red-alert mailings churned out by NRA leaders, all sounding essentially the same alarm: They're out to get your guns.
These letters go not only to the NRA's 2.9 million members, whose $25 annual membership fee brings such benefits as a magazine, gun-theft insurance and safety instruction, but also to 10,000 affiliated hunting organizations and shooting-competition groups.
Time and again, the NRA has proved that citizen action generated by such mailings can have far more effect on legislation than opinion polls, especially when a majority for gun control is relatively silent. "
If a lawmaker is looking for an excuse to vote with the NRA, all he has to say is, 'I got a hundred calls from the NRA, but none from the other side,' " said a congressional aide.
And in a close election, a well-organized, single-interest group such as the NRA can wield decisive power by turning out highly motivated voters.
It was one of these red-alert warnings, written by NRA lobbyist Baker, that had been delivered to 100,000 gun owners in Arizona and riled up the customers at the Dealers Outlet outside Phoenix.
DeConcini's bill calls for a nationwide ban on sales of AK-47s and eight other semiautomatic rifles -- guns enjoying wide popularity because they have the menacing look and much of the firepower of fully automatic assault weapons used by the military and police.
It concluded with a call to arms, warning that DeConcini "needs to know we will not allow our constitutional freedoms to be strangled by restrictions that have absolutely no effect on the criminals who are supposed to be the real target!
"Lies and Exaggerations" GUN OWNERS' rage spread quickly after the NRA letter hit Arizona the last week of April.
In three weeks, DeConcini's office received 6,395 calls and letters against his bill and 68 for it, despite a poll indicating that more than two-thirds of the people in metropolitan Phoenix favor some kind of ban on assault weapons.
"I've been to the four corners of Arizona, and people are shocked and dismayed" by DeConcini's bill, said Landis Aden, a motorcycle-riding computer technician who lobbies part time for the Arizona NRA.
Aden believes that semiautomatic guns would come in handy if a Mexican revolution spilled over the border and Arizonans got caught in the cross fire.
Martin Mandall, a brash Scottsdale gun dealer who insisted that a reporter feel the thrill of firing Uzi and AK-47 machine guns at a range in his store basement, vowed during a conversation there to "work with the utmost severity to get DeConcini out of office."
He said he had sold three years' stock of assault rifles in the two weeks after Bush issued a temporary import ban in March.
Interviewed in his Phoenix office as the firestorm was building, a serene DeConcini accused the NRA of "lies and exaggerations" about his bill; he strongly disputed the NRA's claim that a provision banning any gun "nearly identical" to the nine listed in the measure could be interpreted to cover virtually all semiautomatics.
The recently re-elected senator said he was trying to head off more-drastic legislation from Metzenbaum and others, including California Democratic Reps. Howard L. Berman of Panorama City and Fortney H. (Pete) Stark of Oakland.
(Goldwater made the remark shortly after appearing in a full-page, "I'm the NRA" ad in Time magazine.)
DeConcini, an NRA "Person of the Month" last year, said that NRA officials "flat told me, 'We can't negotiate' " on his bill because "they were burned so badly last year when they negotiated with (then-Atty.
" Later, he said at a Senate hearing on his bill: "By using these tactics, the NRA is succeeding only in alienating its friend closest to the fight."
Foxes in the Henhouse AS THE NRA waged its war in the West, Marion P. Hammer, a 50-year-old grandmother with brown bangs, strode to the front of another heated battleground in Tallahassee, Fla., a packed meeting room in the state's House of Representatives.
A subcommittee was getting ready to vote on a bill that would ban a list of semiautomatic assault weapons, and Hammer had asked to speak against it.
To her supporters, Hammer represents all that is strong about the NRA; to her detractors, much that is weak.
Attacking the crux of the bill, Hammer told the subcommittee: "You cannot differentiate between semiautomatic firearms that look menacing and your routine sporting firearms because, functionally, they are the same."
I would suggest to you that it would not be the first time that the fox has been in the henhouse."
Finally, as NRA Washington lobbyist Baker had done in his letter to Arizona gun owners, Hammer charged that a loosely worded definition in the Florida bill would inadvertently ban all semiautomatic rifles and shotguns.
That is, the ban would cover not just the targeted guns -- the ones with folding stocks that make them easy to conceal, pistol grips, huge ammunition clips and flash suppressors that, according to police, make it easy to spray bullets from the hip.
But doomed as well, she claimed, would be firearms of traditional design long used by hunters and target shooters in one of the nation's gun-owningest states.
One might have expected the House subcommittee to reject the bill handily on that April day.
After all, two years earlier, Hammer had led a phenomenal victory for the NRA in Florida, winning passage of measures that threw out all locally imposed gun restrictions.
The Legislature later closed that seeming loophole in the wake of widespread hoots about the "Gunshine State."
Rising at 4 a.m. after less than four hours' sleep, chain-smoking filter-tip cigarettes, sipping diet sodas -- and aided only by one part-time staffer and a $125,000 yearly budget -- she tirelessly works Capitol corridors and grinds out newsletters aimed at firing up the NRA's 130,000 Florida members to contact their representatives.
Among the plaques and pictures is a Winchester .30-30 carbine from the National Antique Arms Assn., recognizing her as the first woman to receive its "Roy Rogers Man of the Year Award."
Despite her past successes, however, the House panel voted 5-1 to pass the assault-weapons bill along to the full Criminal Justice Committee.
But the surprising setback symbolized the NRA's shifting fortunes, not only in Florida, but across the nation.
One of the NRA's major problems, he said, is that a number of legislative allies have been angered by its strong-arm tactics when the group decided they went astray.
Dramatic evidence of this cropped up the day before the House action, when Sen. John A.
As Hammer sat casually on a table nearby, waiting to request that an NRA videotape be shown to the panel, Grant remarked that "the gun lobby is very well-organized, and I give them credit for being able to rally the troops on very short notice."
When they said I was part of the Gestapo last year, that was a little out of order."
Hammer explained later that Grant was referring to a newsletter in which she had said that a bill in his committee "sets up a modern-day Gestapo movement" because it threatened to invalidate many concealed-weapon permits.
"They called me Judas" because he had backed a Senate leadership team viewed by the NRA as sympathetic to controls on handguns and assault weapons.
Because of the NRA's unwillingness to sit down and work out a reasonable solution to problems perceived by the public, it makes it much more difficult to get their mission accomplished," he said.
For instance, the day of the House subcommittee vote on assault weapons, she was outmaneuvered by Bernard Horn, the state legislative director for Handgun Control, who had flown in from Washington.
Horn gave legislators a booklet picturing both the 27 guns proposed for banning and other semiautomatic rifles that were not on the list but that are popular with hunters.
The move was aimed at shattering the NRA's claim that only cosmetic differences exist between assault weapons and sporting guns.
Because of the booklet, she said, she was no longer willing to support merely a limit on the capacity of ammunition clips -- a fallback position to which Hammer had reluctantly acceded.
Instead of banning assault weapons, the Legislature in June created a commission to study them.
And, instead of enacting a seven-day waiting period for gun buyers, as sought by Handgun Control, it required dealers to make a less-comprehensive background check by telephoning a police computer.
Shortly after adjourning, the Legislature was called back into special session to reconsider a bill that would make it illegal for gun owners to carelessly leave weapons around children.
But after a spate of gun accidents killed three children and wounded three others in early June, Hammer gave conditional support to the bill, and it passed overwhelmingly.
last spring, a riot of orange- and gold-striped tulips swayed outside the gunmetal gray NRA headquarters in Washington.
Inside the eight-story building, many of the 365 employees worked on gun-safety courses, shooting competitions, police firearms training and other services that predominated at the NRA until heavy lobbying against gun control began in the 1970s.
The shift came after the murders of two Kennedys and a King inspired passage of major federal gun regulations in 1968.
In his seventh-floor office, Jim Baker -- one of five in-house lobbyists supplemented by four high-powered outsiders -- had put the finishing touches on his letter to Arizona gun owners, slamming DeConcini's bill.
Over a roast beef sandwich and beer at a plush hotel restaurant, the handsome, 35-year-old former prosecutor was asked whether Barry Goldwater's assertion that hunters don't need assault weapons had undermined the NRA's effort to prevent the ban.
Baker argued that claims of assault-weapon violence are grossly exaggerated and that the Stockton massacre could have been carried out with almost any gun, not just the semiautomatic AK-47 wielded by Patrick Purdy.
A bit more candidly, J. Warren Cassidy, the NRA's executive vice president, later acknowledged that the Goldwater comment had hurt badly.
But Cassidy noted in the interview: "When a guy like Barry or Dennis DeConcini does these things, it's a belt to the solar plexus, because you've counted on these fellows."
Tom Korologos, one of the NRA's well-connected outside lobbyists, recalled another example of the difficulty of fighting off assault-weapon bans.
He said that while touring exhibition booths at the NRA's recent national convention, he came across "a basic .22 rifle that had a big banana clip and a big round thing to hold it with.
An NRA operative conceded that, despite a tough "no-compromise" resolution unanimously adopted at the national convention, the NRA might have to back a compromise bill when Congress takes final action on assault weapons.
"We may be branded as traitors, but that's the nature of the game in this town, to forge agreements and compromises," said the source, who requested anonymity.
Actually, in the face of increasingly well-organized support for gun control, the NRA grudgingly compromised on cop-killer bullets in 1986 and plastic guns in 1988.
To fight assault-weapon bills, Baker said, the NRA hopes to spend $5 million, most of it derived from direct-mail appeals.
In addition, the NRA is continuing to contribute heavily to political campaigns, despite the disappointments it suffered in last year's elections.
In 1988, five incumbents and all 15 challengers supported by the NRA were defeated; although 182 incumbents won, the NRA netted no gain with the $770,000 it poured into campaigns.
For the assault-weapons fight, the NRA has sent dozens of police officers to Washington to offset pro-ban lobbying by police chiefs, launched a national newspaper and TV ad campaign and continued to make available to gun owners a 900 toll phone number that has already produced thousands of NRA form letters to President Bush and members of Congress.
Baker denied that NRA officials had anything to do with the petition drive to purge Bush from membership, saying that it originated with rank-and-filers "obviously disappointed with the President's first six months in office."
But he added that the NRA board of directors would be forced to consider the matter at its September meeting.
For a while, the NRA harshly retaliated against police chiefs who spoke out for gun control, seeking to get chiefs fired in Nashville, Tenn., and Baltimore County, Md.
of Chiefs of Police, said that he and NRA President Joe Foss recently agreed to "keep the debate issue-oriented, without personal attacks."
The most frequent charge against the NRA is the one leveled by DeConcini -- that it lies and exaggerates.
had found that the library group and the NRA "supplied the most accurate information" of all lobbying organizations.
In truth, the compliment appeared in a Library Journal gossip column, citing only the opinion of "a highly placed library source in Washington, D.C. " GraceAnne DeCandido, who wrote the item, said it was based on "dinner-table conversation" with a government bureaucrat.
"To have the NRA use that in support of their policies is beyond ludicrous," she said.
And then, during a break, 1,000 NRA activists filed into a cavernous hall where Merrill L. (Pete) Petoskey, a wildlife biologist from Lewiston, Mich., delivered the opening prayer at the NRA's 118th annual meeting.
"Dear God, Creator of all ... "Please give us the direction to make (gun-control advocates) understand that the actions of criminals, who should be confined, should not be dramatized into legislation that will impose on the rights of millions of law-abiding citizens to own and bear arms for lawful pursuits of recreation and self-defense.
"Please help and guide the leaders of the National Rifle Association and of this nation to preserve and strengthen this freedom and this right.
The news media, the grizzled hero of two wars said, "have a million reasons for us not to have guns.
"With your help," chimed in Wayne R. LaPierre Jr., head of the NRA's lobbying, "we will protect your basic God-given right to defend yourself and to own firearms in this country."
At the NRA's annual banquet that night, actor Charlton Heston evoked his famous movie image of Moses on the mountaintop as he provided the group with an inspirational boost.
That's a semiautomatic weapon, and I do not plan to surrender it," he proclaimed, banging the lectern.
Intoning the punch line of a defiant pro-gun slogan, he suggested that nobody was going to take this weapon from him unless it was pried "from my cold, dead hands!"
For an army of crusaders besieged, it was just the rousing send-off needed for the tough battles ahead.
