Introduction: House Speaker Tom Foley charges that most of the supportfor the term limit proposal in Washington state came from"extreme right-wing activists."
Ron Brown, chairman of theDemocratic National Committee, says "term limits are abackhanded attempt by Republicans to get rid of Democratsthey can't defeat at the polls."
Certainly the polls show that term limits areoverwhelmingly popular with Americans regardless of income,party, race or sex.
Most ofthe authors of Washington state's term limit are liberalDemocrats who want to break up "the old-boy network."
""Incumbency is the glass ceiling of American politics,"says Kay Slaughter, the Democratic candidate in a specialU.S.
Shirley Chisholm, who in 1972 was the first black to runfor a majorparty presidential nomination, says "longtermincumbency is a big reason that Congress no longer works andisn't representative.
Today, former California Governor Jerry Brown saysadvocacy of term limits is a key element in his populistpresidential campaign against a "constipated" politicalsystem. "
Term limits are a castor oil that democracy needs totake," he says.
Last year, as head of the CaliforniaDemocratic Party he refused to sign a party slate maileragainst term limits.
Brown says arguments that legislative staff and theunelected bureaucracy would gain power under term limits aresimply proof that "we must curb the excessive power of thosepolitical players as well."
"Breaking the gridlock of incumbency could throw the doorsopen to new people and new ideas that would make politicsrewarding, meaningful and fun," says Ms. Kunin.
"The systemneeds a kick in the rear," says Mr. Lamm.
The DemocraticCongressional Campaign Committee has quietly put out the wordthat it will blacklist political consultants who advisecandidates to back term limits and has told pollsters not toask term-limit questions.
InMassachusetts, the state's Democratic attorney general andsecretary of state both favor term limits.
However, he concludes "it would be a cost worth paying to berid of the much larger number of time-servers who havelearned nothing from longevity in office except cynicism,complacency and a sense of diminished possibility."
"Such recent body-blows to Congress as Kitegate and theClarence Thomas hearings have convinced some liberal mediaoutlets to reevaluate term limits.
WCVB-TV, the ABC affiliate in Boston,has often had its liberal editorials called "the Boston Globeof the airwaves."
In April, it denounced term limits as "thelatest anti-government fad to sweep the country."
Last month,the station made a highly unusual about-face and endorsedterm limits for Congress: "We're not going to get{leadership} till we have a massive infusion of new blood.
"Among Democratic Party activists, James Calaway of Texasis typical of those who now favor term limits.
Other Texas Democrats who have joinedhim include Frances "Sissy" Farenthold, who cochaired GeorgeMcGovern's 1972 national campaign, and Leonel Castillo, JimmyCarter's director of the Immigration and NaturalizationService.
Neo-liberals, who believe that centralized bureaucraciesare the biggest obstacle to reforming government, are alsowarming to term limits.
David Osborne, who became sort of aguru for neo-liberals with his book "Laboratories ofDemocracy," speaks for many reform-minded liberals when hesays, "Term limits are necessary to shake things up anddisrupt the careerist mindset that leads to so much cowardicein elected officials.
"While Speaker Tom Foley reacts to term limits the way thatLinus in the comic strip "Peanuts" would if his securityblanket were taken away, some House Democrats think hisconcern that term limits would result in large GOP gains inCongress is a fantasy.
"People who say term limits are aRepublican plot to oust incumbents should know that amajority of open seats are won by Democrats," says Rep. AndyJacobs of Indiana.
Indeed, the Democratic Party couldactually be helped by term limits, according to formerOklahoma state legislator Cleta Mitchell, a self-described"liberal feminist" who works with the Denver-based term limitgroup Americans Back in Charge.
"No one suggests the drive to enact term limits will beeasy -- especially in states that ban voter initiatives.
Butthere are already signs that business lobbies, labor unionsand other term limit opponents are relying more on convincingjudges -- starting with Florida's heavily politicized stateSupreme Court -- to overturn state term limits than on tryingto convince voters to reject the idea.
The leading anti-termlimit group, Let the People Decide, has closed itsWashington, D.C., offices and been reduced to a skeletonstaff.
