Introduction:HURRICANES ARE part of the romance of the tropics.
The great storms have madefictional plots of B movies and unmade real dreams of people who would implantcivilization in an environment that could be swallowed up by nature in amoment.
A hurricane ended the dream of a railroad down the Florida Keys in1935 and virtually isolated Key West for two years.
Nine years earlier, a "BigOne" had stopped Miami's first real-estate boom in its tracks, pushingfloodwaters inland to the new jai alai fronton near where Miami InternationalAirport sits today.
The citywas "Lashed" in '47, "Slammed" in '49 and "Pounded" in '50.
The last to hitMiami was Cleo, a small one, in 1964, and the intervening period of calmdefies all odds.
What would one of those legendarystorms of the past with 200 mph winds pushing huge tidal surges do to thislow-lying metropolis on the Atlantic?
Hurricane seasonofficially extends from June 1 through Nov. 30, and scientists at the NationalHurricane Center, tucked away on the sixth floor of a nondescript officebuilding in this Miami suburb, are perking up after another winter lull.
From now until the end of the season, the six hurricane specialists willmonitor weather computers 24 hours a day.
In this part of the world,technology has made obsolete such disasters as the unnamed hurricane thatsurprised Galveston, Texas, in 1900, killing 6,000 people.
When a disturbance becomes threatening, a speciallyequipped plane is sent into the storm's heart to measure barometric pressure,wind speed and temperature.
One of the specialists, Lixion Avila, hasbegun counting tropical waves that form off the coast of Africa every few daysduring hurricane season.
One such year was 1935-- only six hurricanes formed, but one was the strongest to hit the continent.
"At the center, scientistsbuilt a computer model to calculate what would happen if the 1926 hurricanewere to hit Miami today.
The scientists took data from Hugo and applied it to the path taken bythe 1926 hurricane into Miami.
"It would be a totally different storyhere," said Max Mayfield, who collected photos from the 1926 storm toillustrate the model.
"A worst-case storm,with winds topping 150 mph, would put 5 feet of water in Joe's Stone Crabsrestaurant, a Miami Beach landmark, and 9 feet of water on Biscayne Boulevardin downtown Miami.
Hurricanes changedirection and intensify in a matter of hours and, in 24 hours, the specialistssaid, they could miscalculate one's track by 100 miles.
This, and the numberof years since the last major storm hit, has spawned a certain complacencyamong residents that the specialists find disturbing.
"The fire department did a survey, and 90 percent ofthe people they talked to said they wouldn't evacuate for a hurricane,"Mayfield said.
