"The failure to give an answer may cause me and others to beunwilling to vote for his confirmation," Metzenbaum said on "CBS ThisMorning."Sen.
"I do not think it is appropriate to ask a nominee the ultimatequestion as to how he is going to decide a specific case," Specter said.
"I will not support yet another Reagan-Bush Supreme Court nominee who remainssilent on a woman's right to choose, and then ascends to the court to weakenthat right," said Metzenbaum, the only member of the Judiciary Committee whovoted against Thomas' nomination to the Circuit Court of Appeals to theDistrict of Columbia.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said on NBC's "Today" showthat "literally nobody nominated for the Supreme Court should give his or herviews with regard to cases that might come up in the future.
"But Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., said "in the past few months alone the Supreme Court isthrowing out past decisions, and I think it is legitimate to ask Judge Thomas,what do you think of settled law, like Roe vs. Wade (legitimatizing abortion),what do you think of a woman's right to privacy, free speech issues, issues offreedom of religion.
"Civil rights groups have opposed Thomas on groundshe was insensitive to the concerns of minorities and the elderly as chairmanof the federal Equal Employment Opportunities Commission in the 1980s.
"The fact that he is an African-American should not be a basis for avoidingvery careful scrutiny of his civil rights record," said Julius L. Chambers,director of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund.
Thomas, 43, wouldstrengthen the 6-3 conservative majority on the nine member court.
"I kept my word tothe American people and to the Senate by picking the best man for the job onthe merits.
And the fact he's minority, so much the better," Bush said at anews conference outside his vacation home in Kennebunkport, Maine.
"The background of JudgeClarence Thomas is less important than his views and what they mean toprotecting our constitutional rights," said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill. Whenhead of the EEOC during the Reagan administration , Thomas "seemed to go out ofhis way to find ways to weaken some of the basic civil rights protections,"said Simon, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
""I don't want my vote to contribute to an increasingly largeand conservative anti-choice majority on the Supreme Court," said Sen. AlanCranston, D-Calif. Thomas said he looked forward to the confirmationprocess "and to be an example to those who are where I was, and to show themthat, indeed, there is hope.
; WHAT'S NEXT?Now that President Bush hasnominated Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, the next step is up to theSenate.
The Senate Judiciary Committee is expected to begin confirmationhearings in September, after the August recess.
After the committeemakes a recommendation, the nomination will be voted on by the full Senate.
If confirmed promptly, Thomas could be on the Supreme Court by the timeit begins hearing cases in October.
