Just last week, a federal judge hearing a civil rights suit issued anunusual order that employees follow department policy -- and the departmentappealed, winning a temporary delay of the order.
The spotlight that hadbeen trained on the police department and its 8,300 officers now has widenedto take in the equally large sheriff's department.
Block's measured responseto the criticism -- and the lack of a riveting videotape -- have spared himthe level of heat felt by Police Chief Daryl Gates.
"JosephMcNamara, retired chief of San Jose's department and now a fellow at StanfordUniversity's Hoover Institution, said he has been getting calls all summerfrom cities around the country about racism and brutality in theirdepartments.
"Militarizing police is a definite trend in the past 10 years,and part of it is because of the Los Angeles models.
"But some observerssay that, for a variety of political and social reasons, the possibility forsubstantive change on L.A. law's front lines is scant.
"The poor minority communities that do care suffer "alack of organization that really can take advantage of the anger over thepolice and keep some momentum going that could potentially force reforms,"Hicks said.
The King beating led to an investigation of the policedepartment by an independent commission that found racism, brutality,inadequate discipline, mismanagement and a "siege mentality" pitting officersagainst the community.
At the street level, it suggested officers spend more time out of their patrolcars, work more with community groups and ease up on the common practice ofmaking suspects lie face down on the ground even when they pose no apparentthreat.
The city council is reviewing the recommendations, some of which --for instance, a term limit for the chief -- require voter approval.
Like Gates before him, Block maintains hisdepartment is a good one with "a reputation as being one of the mostprogressive, one of the most professional, one of the finest law enforcementagencies.
'A last-resortmechanism'"Law enforcement, and I'm going beyond the sheriff's department,did not create the social conditions out there from which the violence isspringing," he said.
"People are looking at the criminal justice system todayas being the linchpins of government.
"Block pointed to social ills including high drop-out andilliteracy rates, "young people who are raising themselves," and a county jailsystem that is "perhaps the major houser of mentally ill people in our societyin this nation.
There are 950 known street gangs with morethan 99,300 members in the county, according to the sheriff's department.
Agreeing that law enforcement is not the answer to all of society's failures,critics say Block is missing the point.
"The basic goal and mission of law enforcementpeople is to reduce conflict in the community.
The rhetoric of the LosAngeles police establishment through the years seems to have escalatedconflict, not lowered it.
'Window dressing' predictedOn the city side, they worry that theChristopher Commission recommendations will be diluted by the time the citycouncil and voters are finished with them.
"On the county side, critics say Block's position as anelected official insulates him from the kind of independent review the citywas able to order for the police department.
John Burton, an attorney specializing in policemisconduct cases, offers a grim view on the potential for change: "I thinkit's going to get worse, because of the general decay in social conditions andunemployment.
