As her daughters watched, Pierluissi, 24, said it was for them,as much as for herself, that she agreed to be tested for the deadlykiller of Hispanics.
``I was concerned because they said an aunt of mine had it and Ijust wanted to come for the checkup.
All of our family is going togo through the program to make sure that if we have it that we'll dosomething about it.''
Hispanics are three times as likely to developdiabetes as the general population, and 40 percent of the 700,000victims in Texas are Mexican-American.
San Antonio, the nation's ninthlargest city, with a population that is 50 percent Hispanic, isbecoming the base for diabetes studies.
Researchers take a customized mobile home to neighborhoods torandomly check Hispanics and Anglos for the disease, which deprivesthe body of insulin and can lead to complications affecting theheart, kidneys, eyes and nerves.
San Antonio's Hispanic makeup led Dr. Ralph DeFronzo to abandonhis prestigious position as a Yale University diabetes researcherand persuade his four-member team to relocate to the University ofTexas Health Science Center.
An epidemiologist at the center, Dr. Michael Stern, has devoted10 years to studying Hispanic diabetes and led the grassroots studyof Type II diabetes.
Stern said family studies of diabetic patients are brining himcloser to finding the gene that triggers the disease.
``Then you could go out andzero in on the genetic susceptibles and you can be more intense onyour recommendations to them and you could also study that group.''
Stern believes if people exercised more and ate less of thefat-saturated foods common to the diets of low-income Hispanics,fewer would get the disease.
``We don't know why, when they get diabetes, they have a moresevere form of the disease _ whether it's a biological difference oris it that they are not getting as good medical care.
It may be that the gene is there, but for somereason it may not be expressed in the upper-income Mexican-Americans.
``Also, Mexican-Americans tend to have more body fat in theirupper torso and we can see that as related to diabetes.''
Between 1979 and 1988, Stern and his staff studied more than5,000 people and found that 387 of 2,905 Hispanics had the disease,or 13.3 percent, compared to only 87 of 1,780 Anglos, or 4.8 percent.
Researchers believe that poor Hispanics' diets of cheap,processed foods, lack of exercise and infrequent medical attention _either due to poverty or a cultural bias against doctors _ increasestheir risk of acquiring diabetes.
``I went to the screening because they called and said it wasfree.
That's why I went to it, because being poor I couldn't affordto go to the doctor for this type of checkup,'' she said.
DeFronzo, who in 1988 was chosen the top diabetes investigator byCanadian and Japanese diabetes associations, says his unit at theHealth Science Center will try to use many of Stern's patients forresearch.
``The problem with Type II diabetics is not that they don't makeenough insulin; they don't respond to the insulin,'' DeFronzo said.``What we'd like to do is make them more responsive and this drugwill do that.''
The drug is widely used in Europe, Canada and Mexico and shouldbe approved by the Food and Drug Administration in several years forU.S.
``So you have to design an exercise program that is compatiblewith the patient's lifestyle and it is something they can do.
