Introduction: Canadians were shamed, angry and saddened Tuesdaythat national hero Ben Johnson was stripped of his Olympic goldmedal for using drugs to enhance his performance.
He hasn't got the guile to do that.''
A disappointed nation awaited the return of the sprinter after aurine sample was found to contain traces of anabolic steroids.
Canada's sole gold medal went to American Carl Lewis, who finishedsecond in the 100-meter dash.
``It puts a dent in Canada,'' said Scott Shaw, a 10th gradestudent in Calgary, Alberta, said Tuesday.
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who had thanked the Jamaican-bornrunner for the ``thrill of a lifetime'' after his record-breaking9.79-second performance Saturday, called the drug scandal ``amoment of great sorrow for all Canadians.''
Sports Minister Jean Charest, who called the incident ``anational embarrassment,'' said Johnson will be banned from Canada'snational team for life.
Charest said his government accepted thevalidity of the tests and the suspension would be effective pendingan appeal from Johnson.
``My brother is not guilty,'' a distaught Rodney told reportersin her yard in the Toronto suburb of Rexdale.
Outside the townhouse, police were called in to control thecrowd and the traffic.
``We've just seen the destruction of a role model,'' said formerdownhill skier Ken Read, of Calgary, now Canada's representative onthe International Olympic Committee's athletics commission.
It was the second shock to national sports fans in recentmonths.
In August, fans were outraged when hockey legend WayneGretzky, another national hero, was traded from the Edmonton Oilersto the Los Angeles Kings.
Mike Sokowski, a teammate at the 1984 Olympic Games in LosAngeles, said: ``Ben's a pretty simple guy.
``From time to time people would come to me in a private way _ and this happened one or two times ... that maybe Ben Johnson isusing steroids or other drugs,'' he said.
He said the allegations came from no one officially connectedwith the Olympic team and that he had heard similar, unfoundedallegations about other atheletes in the past.
Johnson was last tested in Canada in February at a Montreallaboratory.
Charest said he didn't press Johnson to have a drug test becausehe thought the sprinter was aware that medal winners at theOlympics would be tested for drugs immediately followingcompetition.
``Everybody knew in advance that Mr. Johnson, if he wins amedal, was going to be tested,'' said Charest.
