Introduction:   ``Mad cow disease'' has killed 10,000 cattle,restricted the export market for Britain's cattle industry andraised fears about the safety of eating beef.
The government insists the disease poses only a remote risk tohuman health, but scientists still aren't certain what causes thedisease or how it is transmitted.
The symptoms are very much likescrapie, a sheep disease which has been in Britain since the 1700s.
The incurable disease eats holes in the brains of its victims; inlate stages a sick animal may act skittish or stagger drunkenly.
The suspicion is that the disease was transmitted through cattlefeed, which used to contain sheep by-products as a proteinsupplement.
The government banned the use of sheep offal in cattle feed inJune 1988, and later banned the use of cattle brain, spleen,thymus, intestines and spinal cord in food for humans.
``I think it is a recognition _ not just of pressure fromfarmers _ but that the public would feel more confident that noBSE-infected animal would ever be likely to go anywhere near thefood chain if there was 100 percent compensation,'' said Sir SimonGourlay, president of the National Farmers Union.
As of Feb. 9, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Foodsaid that 9,998 cattle have been destroyed after being diagnosedwith BSE.
Ireland's Department of Agriculture and Food said about 20 caseshave been confirmed there, all of them near the border with theBritish province of Northern Ireland.
Because of the disease, the U.S. Department of Agriculture'sAnimal and Plant Health Inspection Service banned imports ofcattle, embryos and bull semen from Great Britain in July, saidMargaret Webb, a USDA spokeswoman in Washington.
Similar embargoes have been imposed by Australia, Finland,Israel, Sweden, West Germany and New Zealand, according to theagriculture ministry, and the European Community has proposed a banon exports of British cattle older than 6 months.
David Maclean, a junior agriculture minister, has complained of``BSE hysteria'' in the media and has insisted that the risk of thedisease passing to humans is ``remote.''
The government has committed $19 million to finding the cause ofthe disease.
The report said the disease was impossible to detect inapparently healthy animals because it did not prompt the immunesystem to produce antibodies.
But the report added: ``If ourassessments of these likelihoods are incorrect, the implicationswould be extremely serious.''
According to a report in the British Medical Journal, theincidence of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is no higher in Britain thanit is in countries free of scrapie.
``It is urgent that the same reassurance can be given about thelack of effect of BSE on human health,'' a consultative committeereported to the agriculture ministry.
