That is the vexing question facing Mr LewisPreston, the former chairman of J P Morgan, the New York bank, who takesover as president of the World Bank this September.
As bankers and finance ministers gathered in Washington this weekend for thespring meetings of the bank and International Monetary Fund, there was noshortage of advice.
The US Treasury wants the bank to bypass the governmentsof developing countries and lend sizeable sums directly to the privatesector.
The bank is also under pressure to follow the example of Mr JacquesAttali's European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and attachstrict political conditions to its loans.
Development economists, meanwhile,are urging the bank to respect the rhetoric of last year's World DevelopmentReport and focus more on poverty alleviation.
Few in Washington now doubt that the bankis needed: new imperatives, such as reconstruction in eastern Europe and theMiddle East, have merely been superimposed on older, unsolved problems:Grinding poverty is a near universal condition in much of the world: 1bnpeople live on less than Dollars 1 a day.
In Mexico, life expectancy for the poorest 10per cent is 20 years less than for the richest 10 per cent.
The morale of staff is lousy,' says Mr Charles Flickner, asenior analyst on the Senate Budget Committee and close observer of thebank.
Although nowwell-liked (partly for championing causes such as women's rights in theThird World), many observers say he never fully recovered from a rocky startinvolving a divisive internal reorganisation of the bank.
Mr Percy Mistry, a scholar at Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford, and formersenior adviser at the bank, says it suffered from 'presidential failure'during the 1980s.
Mr Robert McNamara, a forceful chief executive in the1970s, built a presidential institution that responded to firm leadershipfrom the top.
For a decade the bankhas effectively been run by two senior - and strong-willed -vice-presidents: Mr Ernest Stern (who nearly left last year to join theEBRD) and Mr Moeen Qureshi.
In spite of recentprogress in a few countries, such as Mexico, the past decade has been one ofrelative failure.
The biggest drag on growth is the huge debt accumulated in the 1970s andearly 1980s.
Many optimists see the debt reduction strategy launched by MrNicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary, in 1989, as a 'final solution' tothe debt crisis.
Under the plan official agencies assume some of the burdenof developing countries' private debts on condition that they implementmarket-oriented economic reforms.
Officials such as Mr David Mulford of the US Treasury say therecent forgiveness of about half of Poland's official debt will not set aprecedent for other debtors.
'The bank failed to take a timely leadership position on the debt crisis,'concludes Mr Richard Feinberg, director of the Overseas Development Councilin Washington.
The main innovation of the 1980s was a switch fromproject lending to 'structural adjustment' lending.
He concludes (as dointernal bank analyses) that policy-based lending has 'achieved something,particularly in relation to the external account, but not nearly as much asthe bank and donor community hoped'.
On average programmes have reducedbalance of payments gaps, had a negligible impact on Gross National Productand led to falls in the ratio of investment to GNP.Mr Feinberg calls the decline in investment the 'great shortcoming ofstructural adjustment lending in the 1980s'.
He says thebank was naive to expect entrepreneurs to respond to the austerity ofadjustment by increasing investment.
How can the bank do better in the 1990s?
The maturing of bank programmesand the failure to expand lending much in the 1980s has led to a markedshrinkage in its net transfers to developing countries.
According to MrLawrence Summers, the bank's chief economist, net transfers over the nextfive years will be about Dollars 2 per person in the developing worldcompared with Dollars 9 (in current prices) in the late 1970s.
For the largenumber of countries that do not qualify for concessional loans, the net flowwill be negative.
Some analysts, including US Treasury officials, believe lacklustreperformance in much of the Third World reflects the inefficiency (andsometimes corruption) of governments.
The EBRD's constitution requiresborrowers to be 'committed to and applying the principles of multi-partydemocracy, pluralism and market economics'.
It also says 60 per cent of EBRDresources must be devoted to the commercial sector - private businesses andstate concerns in the process of privatisation.
The World Bank operatesunder very different rules: its charter requires it to be non-political andonly its small affiliate, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), canmake direct loans to private businesses.
Should the bank's charter beamended?Direct parallels between the bank and the EBRD are dubious.
The EBRD isministering to a region that has historical ties with western Europe andthat has declared its commitment to democracy and free markets.
If strict politicalconditionality had been imposed in the past, the bank could not have lent toa development star such as South Korea.
Mr Flicknerof the Senate Budget Committee says the issue is not whether to insist onWestminster-style democracy but whether the form of governance is such that'loans will benefit the majority of the people'.
Bank officials say greaterattention will be paid to issues such as the rule of law and transparency ofdecision-taking.
Should a significant chunk of the bank's loans be made direct to the privatesector?
He says the bank's main aim is to combat poverty and that it will seek a'balanced relationship between government and the market' in developingcountries.
In reality, much of the most badly-needed investment is inspheres such as infrastructure, health care and education where governmentsplay a dominant role even in industrialised countries.
Indeed, one conclusion of Prof Toye's analysis is that policy-based loanswould have a greater chance of success if they included measures to expandthe role of the state in poorer countries alongside measures to promoteeconomic liberalisation.
Sir William Ryrie, the head of the IFC, says the objective of a large volumeof public lending to the private sector is wrong-headed. '
Advocates of a switch to direct support of the private sectorare surely not arguing for public subsidies for Third World entrepreneurs;but if subsidies are ruled out, why should the bank's judgment of marketrisk be more reliable than that of private lenders in the west?There are alternative recipes for fostering faster Third World development.
During the 1980s the bank placed great faith in free market nostrums.
Itwanted to impose on developing countries policies that had become recentlyfashionable in the industrialised world.
The bank'sown research department is highlighting the need to relieve poverty directlyand to improve fundamentals, such as education, nutrition and health care.
Mr Feinberg at theOverseas Development Council broadly agrees: the bank has got to find a wayof 'melding equity and efficiency as it promotes development'.The challenge for Mr Preston is clear: put the sterile ideological battlesof the 1980s behind the bank and develop policies that put greater emphasison the formation of human capital.
Mr Summers, the bank's economist, says pessimistically that becausedevelopment money will be in short supply over the next decade, the bank andother donors will have to concentrate on exporting ideas.
