Introduction:As Congress goes back into session today, the gulf betweenlegislators and the American people has never been greater.
Arecent Gallup survey found that 70% of House Members opposethe idea of limiting the number of congressional terms, whilethe public backed the idea two to one.
Now a detailed NewYork Times/CBS poll has found that Members of Congress may bethe only demographic group in the country that doesn't favorlimits on terms.
The rest of the country is frustrated with alegislature where the turnover is about that of thenon-elected British House of Lords.
The idea of limiting terms is overwhelmingly popular withAmericans regardless of party, ideology or income.
Women aremore in favor of the idea than men.
The root of the problems with Congress is that, barringmajor scandal, it is almost impossible to defeat anincumbent.
In the past three elections, 96% or more of Houseincumbents who ran won.
One out of four House districtsthis year likely will have an incumbent running with nomajor-party opposition -- up from one out of five in 1988.One-candidate races are now spreading to the Senate.
Last year, Mr. Pressler sent out morethan 2.8 million pieces of mail, the equivalent of 10 piecesper household.
Critics of term-limits say that -- franked mail or not --it's wrong to blame Congress for the now nearly 100%re-election rates since it is just as easy to vote against anincumbent as for.
This presumes that voters can find out who the othercandidate is.
That takes money, andskewed campaign finance laws combined with taxpayer-paid junkmail effectively mean that only incumbents have the cash tomake themselves known and to be taken seriously by the media.
The polls indicate voters by two to one think the only waythey can control Congress effectively is by limiting terms.
We also note that these critics are not agitating in supportof Ronald Reagan's call for repeal of the two-term limit forPresidents.
A big problem of the current system limitingPresidents but not Congress is that this means politicalpower is constantly tipped in favor of the legislativebranch.
Getting incumbents to reduce the advantages they havevoted themselves is something like asking banks to leavetheir vaults unlocked.
That's why the Washington, D.C.-basedAmericans to Limit Congressional Terms is asking states tocall for a constitutional amendment to limit terms.
The opinion pollsfor term limitation show that the voters don't like thechange.
