Introduction: Police captured the top military leader of theShining Path, a Maoist rebel group whose eight-year guerrilla warhas taken more than 10,000 lives in Peru, officials said Monday.
Officials said the capture of Osman Morote, 43, considered themost radical leader of the movement, was the hardest blow to datefor the rebels since they launched their guerrilla war in theAndean highlands in May 1980.
2 of the party and itsmilitary chief,'' the independent magazine Si said recently.
``Forsome Shining Path experts, Morote might even be, in practice, thetrue leader of the organization.''
The Shining Path is seeking to overthrow Peru's electedgovernment and install a peasant and worker state patterned afterthe ideas of Mao Tse-tung.
Counterinsurgency sources said police raided the house afterneighbors told them of suspicious behavior by the people livingthere.
Col. Javier Palacios, a top official in the counterinsurgencypolice, presented Morote to the press Monday but did let him speak.
The colonel said Morote arrived in Lima a week ago from thenorthern highlands to coordinate terrorists attacks in the capital.
Palacios said the attacks were planned this week to mark the secondanniversary of prison riots in which security forces killed morethan 250 rebel inmates.
There have been reports in recent months of a growing rivalrybetween Morote and Guzman, and Mantilla said he did not discountthe possibility that Guzman betrayed Morote to get him out of theway.
Morote, known within the rebel band as ``Comrade Remigio,'' issecond in importance only to Guzman, who founded the Shining Pathas a splinter group of the Peruvian Communist Party.
The Shining Path devoted itself to 10 years of semi-clandestinepolitical work with peasants in the impoverished Andean highlandsbefore taking up arms.
Guzman is the ideologist of the organization, but Morote isconsidered the military strategist of the guerrillas and theadvocate of attacks against peasant communities in the highlandsthat have formed civil defense units on the orders of the military.
Counterinsurgency sources said Morote's capture will create apower vacuum within the central committee of the Shining Path andspark tension until a replacement is found.
