Introduction: The Agriculture Department says it has been ontop of the drought since March 1, monitoring the situation, settingup hotlines to handle worried callers and issuing enough statementsto paper a thousand bird cages, easy.
One of the latest informational gimmicks is a ``USDABackgrounder'' listing the department's ``drought-related actions''since the blotter-like furnaces began roaring across most of thenation.
``It was my idea, my memory isn't what it used to be,'' quippedSally Michael, the department's deputy director of information.``This helps me keep track of what we've done.''
Michael agreed during questioning by a reporter that the actionlist is lean on actual dollars going into the drought aid.
One involved meat purchases for schoolcafeterias and the other a credit deal for the sale of meat toMexico.
The firstlists 22 separate drought ``actions'' by USDA or its people,beginning more than four months ago.
Secretary of Agriculture Richard E. Lyng establishesUSDA Drought Task Force under the chairmanship of Deputy SecretaryPeter C. Myers.
Members _ agency administrators and key USDApersonnel _ will constantly monitor the potential droughtsituation.''
The blurb also gave the number of the USDA press release thatformally announced the task force creation, but not its date.
Inreality, though the drought panel was set up by Lyng on March 1,the press release announcing the action was not issued until April22.
Department officials questioned at the time said they attachedno significance to keeping the task force secret for seven weeksbefore announcing it.
Excerpts from other USDA actions cited by the report:   _ May 31.
Counties found to be suffering from drought will beallowed emergency haying and grazing of Acreage ConservationReserve (ACR) and Conservation Use Acreage (CUA).
At this time,haying and grazing do not apply to Conservation Reserve Program(CRP) acreage.
Standing hay on farms held in inventory (taken over) bythe Farmers Home Administration can be sold at a reasonable cost tohelp feed livestock in drought counties where state offices of theAgricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service have authorizedrelease of set-aside acres for haying and grazing.
Lyng briefs Senate and House Agriculture Committees onthe drought and offers to cooperate with the Congressional ReliefTask Force announced by Sen. Patrich Leahy, D-Vt., and Rep. Kika dela Garza, D-Texas.
The White House announces a new Interagency DroughtPolicy Committee made up of USDA, Interior, the Office of the VicePresident and several other agencies.
Departments of State andTransportation, and the Council of Economic Advisers weresubsequently added.
Lyng announces that farmers in designated droughtcounties will be authorized to harvest hay from land in theConservation Reserve Program.
Haying will be allowed for 30 days iffarmers give up part of their CRP payments.
The Interagency Drought Policy Committee meets for thefirst time.
Lyng announces haying will be allowed on CRP land if acounty has been approved for emergency haying and grazing of ACRand CUA land due to drought.
Lyng meets with the Congressional Drought Relief TaskForce, which issues a ``statement of general agreements'' callingon the secretary to implement various forms of disaster assistance.
Lyng and other USDA officials meet in Chicago with theNational Governors' Association Committee on Agriculture and RuralDevelopment.
Returning to Washington, Lyng briefs the president andvice president on the drought and says that there is agreementamong congressmen, senators, farm groups and governors that it istoo early for emergency relief measures.
After the White House meeting, the Interagency DroughtPolicy Committee meets for the second time at USDA.
Greatest number of calls thefirst day are from Iowa, Wisconsin and North Dakota.
USDA announces that special crop surveys in severalstates and other steps will be taken to update the department'sJuly 12 crop report and supply-and-demand projections for fallharvets, including corn and soybeans.
An additional $50 million has been set aside to buybulk ground beef for donation to schools lunch and other feedingprograms, to help cattle producers hurt by drought.
Lyng authorizes additional emergency provisions indrought counties, including permission for selling hay to anyone,and the harvest of ACR, CUA and CRP land as green chop forimmediate feeding to livestock or silage.
Federal and state officials set up a national hayinformation network, or HayNet, to assist in locating foragesupplies.
Department will hold news conference July 12 followingrelease of crop report and supply-demand projections.
The purchases are intended to helpbolster livestock markets depressed by drought liquidation of herds.
