Local militiamen shot down a federalarmy helicopter as it flew over the capital, killing thepilot and co-pilot, the Associated Press reported.
In Croatia, the army moved into areas where fightingerupted between Croats and minority Serbs, Yugoslavia's twolargest nationalities and historic rivals.
The first shooting between the federal army and themilitias occurred here, in the mountains that mark the borderwith Austria.
In midafternoon, the customshouse was rattled with a burst of rifle fire and a fewminutes later it was rocked by three projectiles fromanti-tank guns.
The blasts left holes in the roof and walls and shatteredwindows in the house.
The Slovenes, about three dozen strong,waved a white sheet from one of the windows, laid down theirweapons and were marched down the road.
The scene was like something out of the U.S. Civil War,where civilians gathered for picnics to watch the earlybattles.
Here, the drama was watched by several Yugoslavstrying to return to their country from Austria; the cooks,waitresses and a few guests at restaurants on both sides ofthe border; several tourists who were caught on the Yugoslavside; and a dozen Austrian customs officers and policemen.
Those on the Austrian side gathered near the restaurant'sbeer garden and watched through binoculars as the armysoldiers moved through the forest, and then they scrambledfor cover when shots were fired.
"Yesterday we had a big party, and today we're fighting,"moaned Bogataj Vejko, a truck driver from near Ljubljana, whohad safely crossed the border early in the morning and wasnow trying to get back home.
After the shooting stopped, he talked to a group ofthe federal soldiers, and discovered that some wereconscripts from Slovenia. "
"After the army established control, Milan Jelen, a Slovenebusinessman, reached into the backseat of his car andretrieved his son's toy slingshot. "
"Emil Herlec, a leader of the local Slovene mountain rescueteam, scrambled up the mountain, through the woods, when heheard the shooting. "
He called on Slovenes in the federalarmy to desert and join the republic's militia.
But the poorly trained and equipped Slovene and Croatianmilitias, formed in the past several months, are no match forthe 180,000-strong federal army.
The local militias also havenothing to counter the central government's several thousandtanks and other armored vehicles, not to mention thegovernment's air forces.
Politically, the two republics' declarations ofindependence have been ignored by the rest of the world,which supports a united Yugoslavia.
On the contrary, the European Community and theU.S.
have lobbied heavily for the maintainance of theYugoslav state, and have threatened to withhold millions ofdollars in aid if the country breaks up.
Mr. Baker and White Housespokesman Marlin Fitzwater had suggested to reportersWednesday that the breakaway republics be granted greaterautonomy and sovereignty within a united Yugoslavia.
And onTuesday night, after the two republics declared theirindependence, the federal parliament called on the army tointervene.
In a letter to Slovenia's premier, Gen. KonradKolsek of the federal military district that controlsSlovenia said he had orders to seize all border crossings andwould "crush" any resistence.
The independence declarations came after months ofunsuccessful negotiations among the leaders of the sixrepublics over the post-Cold War shape of Yugoslavia.
TheCommunist leadership of Serbia, Yugoslavia's largestrepublic, insists on strong central control from Belgrade,the capital of both Serbia and Yugoslavia.
The nationalistgovernments of Slovenia and Croatia have been demanding alooser confederation of sovereign republics.
And they fear losing the economic support ofSlovenia and Croatia, the two wealthiest republics.
On theother hand, Slovenia and Croatia say they could no longertolerate the erosion of their finances by theSerbian-dominated bureaucracy.
Together, Slovenia, with two million people, and Croatia,with five million, supply nearly two-thirds of Yugoslavia'sforeign exchange and about half of the country's grossnational product.
