Introduction:LONDON -- A shadow is falling across the light at theBritish end of the Channel Tunnel.
The Thatcher government's announcementyesterday that it wouldn't help fund a high-speed rail linkbetween London and the tunnel has fueled fears that thecountry's creaky transportation system will isolate Britainon the periphery of Europe.
Sarah Talbot-Williams, a spokeswoman for the Confederationof British Industry , Britain's main employers' group says,"1992 is going to produce a much more competitive market. "
Ifwe don't have the infrastructure to get the goods to Europe,we'll continue our status as an island.
And although theproject's estimated cost has soared to #7.66 billion ($13.11billion) from #4.9 billion, tunnel executives have obtainedunderwriting for an equity rights offer and preliminaryagreement for more bank loans to cover the added cost.
"But the lack of a high-speed rail link to London, andimproved service beyond, means Britain may miss out on thetunnel's total benefits.
"There is a danger of not being ableto exploit the tunnel to its full potential," says Prof.Christopher Nash, a transport expert at Leeds University inNorthern England.
The government's refusal to help fund a fast rail servicebetween London and the tunnel terminal at Folkestoneculminates an 18-month squabble.
European Rail Link Ltd., aconsortium formed last November to build the rail link, hadasked the government to contribute #350 million towards thetotal #2.6 billion cost of the link.
Defending the decision, Mrs. Thatcher earlier toldParliament that the government already had earmarked almost#2 billion for chunnel-related projects, including #600million on roads leading to the tunnel and #1.3 billion inpassenger and freight rail services.
As a result of Thursday's decision, the journey time toLondon from Paris will be about three hours -- 30 minuteslonger than with a high-speed rail link.
"The traffic will now speed through as far as our side ofthe tunnel, and then the men with red flags will lead it onto London," complains Keith Speed, a Conservative member ofParliament whose constituency is near the tunnel terminal.
Eurotunnel insists the tunnel will be financially viablewithout the high-speed rail link.
The tunnel-buildingconsortium argues that only 39% of its total revenue willcome from direct London-to-Paris trains; the realmoney-spinner will be freight traffic hauled by road to thetunnel, then loaded onto special Eurotunnel wagons for thejourney under the channel.
"There is in no sense a feeling we must havethat link to make the tunnel successful.
The high-speed link "will be abenefit for us," he says, "but essential for the country.
North of the capital,industrialists fear poor railway links will isolate them onthe fringes of the European Community's single market.
"The Channel Tunnel is a marvelous addition to theinfrastructure," says David Merrill, corporate-affairsdirector at Pilkington PLC, the big glass maker based in St. Helens in Northwest England.
