Introduction: The stripping of Ben Johnson's Olympic gold medalin a drug scandal has wounded Canadian pride and shamed a nationhungry for a hero to replace hockey superstar Wayne Gretzky.
``It's like Wayne Gretzky getting run over by a car,'' said PatReid, the Canadian high-jump coach.
The spirit of a nation raced with Johnson when he won the goldmedal in the 100 meters on Saturday with a world record time of9.79 seconds.
The euphoria was dashed when Johnson tested positivefor stanzolol, a muscle-building steroid outlawed by Olympicofficials.
He was stripped of the medal Tuesday.
``The only thing we can say is that it is a tragedy, a mistakeor sabotage,'' Heidebrecht said.
Johnson, a 26-year-old Jamaican transplant, waved the Canadianflag in triumph and dedicated his gold to his mother and allCanadian citizens.
He returned home with a jacket over his head, hurdling a hedgeto duck reporters after flying home from New York in the seclusionof a jet cockpit.
It was unheroic conduct for the world's fastest human, who hadbeen awarded the Order of Canada and a medal from Queen Elizabethat the Commonwealth Games.
Johnson's disgrace was heralded in Canadian headlines such as``Fool's Gold,'' `` Black Day For Canada,'' ``Seconds Of Glory,Years Of Shame,'' ``From Fame To Shame,'' and ``Big Ben is NowHas-Ben.''
Some of us don't want to accept whathappened,'' said John Furedy, a psychologist at the University ofToronto, in assessing the mational psyche.
``We all share some of the responsibility in the sense that weput such tremendous pressure on these people,'' Furedy said.
Trent Frayne, sports columnist for the Globe and Mail ofToronto, said Johnson's victory was the biggest event in Canadasince a national team beat the Soviet Union in a seven-game hockeyseries in 1972.
The drug scandal brought the same sickening feeling to thenation as did Gretzky's trade to the Los Angeles Kings.
``It's as if an entire country has gone into a period ofnational mourning on his behalf,'' wrote columnist John Robertsonof the Toronto Star.
Canada has always tried to escape the influence of the UnitedStates, where its dollar is worth 80 cents.
Now it has forfeitedits only gold medal of the Olympics.
``He tarnished the name and reputation of Canada and let itspeople down,'' said the Fredickton Gleaner.
But columnist Gary Lautens of the Toronto Star said the nationshould not cover its head in shame.
It's time somebodyreminded us nobody tried to peddle arms for hostages, nobody shotdown a civilian airliner, nobody booby-trapped a home.
