Introduction: It's been described as the largest current civilengineering project, a multibillion dollar link that will helprevolutionize Europe's economy and physically end Britain'shistoric isolation, a dream born in Napoleon's day.
The ``Chunnel'' between Britain and France is half-dug andscheduled to open on time in three years.
But the three-tunnelthoroughfare under the English Channel is almost 60 percent overbudget, embroiled in a contractor dispute and scrambling for moreinvestment money.
``We will have the money to finish the project,'' says AlastairMorton, British deputy chairman of Eurotunnel, the privately ownedAnglo-French company overseeing the work.
The Chunnel's June 15, 1993 scheduled debut will come six monthsafter the 12-nation European Community formally drops remainingtrade barriers and becomes a unified marketplace of 320 millionconsumers.
But the project's success hinges on much more than justfinishing the undug part.
While the French are forging ahead with a high-speed rail linkto their end of the tunnel, for example, state-owned British Railis dragging.
``Britain becomes branch line of Europe,'' a Guardian newspaperheadline declared after the government announced June 14 that itwould not fund a high-speed rail link between London and theBritish end of the tunnel.
It's not the first time the idea of a tunnel has irritatedBritain's island identity.
The British resisted an undersea bondwith the continent envisioned nearly 200 years ago by a Frenchengineer named Albert Mathieu.
The Chunnel project also has been marred by eight accidentaldeaths on the site.
In this country, the attitude to theseprojects tends to be the reverse,'' Morton told a recent newsconference.
Giant boring machines are digging three tunnels toward eachother from Folkestone, England and Calais, France, with the firstunderground meeting expected in November in the service tunnelbetween the rail tunnels.
Tunneling is three months ahead of schedule on the French side,a week behind on the British.
Chunnel trains will carry passengers, cars and freight betweenLondon and Paris in about three hours, roughly the same time as aflight including ground travel, and at least twice as fast as acar-ferry journey.
Eurotunnel estimates that 28 million passengers and 17 percentof Britain's non-oil trade will pass through the tunnel in thefirst year.
The Civil Aviation Authority says the tunnel shoulddivert 5 million out of 53 million air passengers annually.
That step could clear the way for abank syndicate's approval of additional credit Eurotunnel hasrequested, from $8.6 billion to $12 billion.
Assuming banks approve, the project would have a total of about$14.6 billion in debt and equity financing.
But the order of magnitude of increase will slow down,'' saidRichard Hannah, a transport analyst with the London investment firmUBS Phillips and Drew.
``It's one of these situations where the more money you put in,the more you have to spend or else you're walking away frombillions of pounds,'' Hannah said.
In October, concern about the rising pricetag drove Eurotunnel'sbanking syndicate to freeze funds for three months until thecompany reached a truce with Trans-Manche Link, the consortium of10 British and French contractors doing the construction, overresponsibility for $1.7 billion in overruns.
The French government, on the contrary, is spending roughly $2.8billion building 210 miles of rail from Paris to the tunnel, with abranch to Brussels, where the EC is headquartered.
One reason the French are enthusiastic is that the tunnelsurfaces in one of the most depressed areas of France.
