Introduction: An annual Agriculture Department surveyconfirmed Thursday that a deadening drought will curtail the fallcorn harvest by a third or more, resulting in higher retail foodprices for months and years to come.
The new surveys led USDA experts to predict the 1988 corn cropwill total 4.48 billion bushels, down 37 percent from last year'sharvest and the smallest output since 1983.
Cotton, which thrived last month in the hot,humid weather, is expected to increase from last year.
Overall, the department's Agricultural Statistics Board puttotal U.S. crop production at 88 percent of the 1977 average, ascale used to compare output from year to year.
The corn crop is expected to average 78.5 bushels per harvestedacre, down from 119.4 bushel per acre last year, a recordyear-to-year decline of 34 percent.
Corn is the largest and most important crop grown by Americanfarmers and, as a feed ingredient, is essential to the productionof meat, poultry and dairy products.
Assistant Secretary Ewen M. Wilson, the department's chiefeconomist, said the drought may add 1 percent to the cost of foodthis year, 2 percent next year.
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate AgricultureCommittee, said in a statement, ``Today's crop report confirms ourfears about the impacts of this summer's tragic drought.
In May and June, before drought had made its biggestimpact, USDA projected the corn harvest _ based on trends and anassumption of normal weather _ at 7.3 billion bushels.
But those projections were revised downward a month ago to 5.2billion bushels, assuming farmers got normal weather the remainderof the season.
The soybean harvest was estimated at 1.47 billion bushels, down23 percent from 1.9 billion bushels produced last year.
Production of all wheat was indicated at 1.82 billion bushels,down 13 percent from 2.1 billion produced in 1987.
In May and June,the USDA forecast this year's output would be up slightly.
The Julyprojection was 1.84 billion bushels The wheat total included winter wheat planted last fall, whichbarely stayed ahead of the drought.
But durum and the other springvarieties, which are produced in the hard-hit northern plains,showed sharp declines.
Durum was estimated at 54.6 million bushels, down 41 percentfrom last year's harvest, and other spring wheat was shown at 212million bushels, down 53 percent from 1987.
The total grain supply for 1988-89 _ whichincludes inventories on hand at the beginning of the season _ isdown 24 percent from last season.
In addition to the reductions in corn and soybean yields, Wilsonsaid production of some other spring-planted crops has suffered,including: oats, 206 million bushels, down 45 percent; barley, 288million bushels, also down 45 percent; and sorghum, 561 millionbushels, down 24 percent.
The department has forecast a food price increase this year of 3percent to 5 percent.
Before the heat and dry weather, USDA hadexpected a 1988 food price hike of 2 percent to 4 percent.
Wilson said the drought could add 2 percent to the consumerprice index for food next year.
``That's on top of an additional estimated increase in foodprices somewhere in the region of 4 percent,'' Wilson said.
He also said the United States is ``looking at an exportsituation that is not as good as it was a year ago.''
He saidproduction abroad would have to take up the slack in world foodsupply caused by the drought.
Meanwhile, USDA weatherman Norton Strommen said rain in themidcontinent in recent days has not meant an end to the drought.
