Introduction: The brutal beating of Rodney Glen King by Los Angelespolicemen offers convincing evidence that a code of silenceexists within that department, but it also illustrates asimilar reluctance of the nation's police chiefs to criticizea fellow chief.
Thesecriminals in uniform would not have dared their brutality hadthey feared that any of the 17 other police officers watchingwould report their criminal actions.
Blatant racist jokes and comments about the beating on thepolice communications system make it hard to believe thatthis was an "aberration" as Chief Daryl Gates claims.
Theculture of the department that allowed the brutalizing ofRodney Glen King was created under Mr. Gates's leadership.
Yet we, his fellow police chiefs, have for years remainedsilent about Mr. Gates, who yesterday was put on a 60-dayleave by the Los Angeles Police Commission.
Afew years ago Chief Gates referred to gang members as "dirtylittle cowards," and warned them that "there is resoundingapplause to every fall of the hammer."
The exchange soundedmore like one gang challenging another than a police chiefseeking to reduce conflict in the community.
Hundreds of gang homicides occur every year inLos Angeles despite sweeps by the city's police.
But this kind of reasoning isforeign to a man who publicly claimed that his SWAT teamcould free the Iranian hostages.
Similarly, Mr. Gates vehemently opposed the Police CorpsProgram backed by other police chiefs.
The Police Corps wouldsend idealistic young people, including minorities, to servea three -- or four -- year tour of duty after collegegraduation in return for federal funding of their educations.
Yet the presence of such"non-professionals" would discourage the racism and brutalityexposed by the Rodney King beating.
The presence of even onepolice corps officer witness would have deterred the criminalcops.
The nationality of the murdererwas irrelevant.
Mr. Gates's statement did nothing to lessenthe tragedy of the fallen officer, but like his statementabout blacks, it gave comfort to bigots within and outsidethe department.
And it hardly reduced conflict in a citywhere the majority of the population is made up of minoritieswho need and deserve police protection, whether or not theyare citizens.
The unit had advance knowledge that crimeswere about to occur, but often stayed outside and letrobberies occur, even though innocent retailers and customerswere put at risk.
The chief said that arresting the criminalsbefore the robberies wasn't a good idea because the courtswere so lenient.
The unit has been allowed to continue tooperate despite its high shooting rate -- or, worse still,because of the shootings.
Mr. Gatesreluctantly admitted that the officers who did the ransackingwere wrong, but said he could understand their frustration intrying to fight drugs.
And his initial reaction on television to the Rodney Kingbrutality tapes was defensive.
Mr. Gates saidthat while he was shocked, he wasn't drawing conclusions andwould look into the "background," of the incident.
He hascalled for prosecution of three of the officers, and hasproduced a videotape for his troops condemning the beating.
But condemnation of misconduct and excessive force shouldhave been a constant message from the command staff beforethe brutality, and not an afterthought.
He said that he hoped the incident might help Mr. King to straighten out his life.
Or was thechief suggesting that the beating was a warning againstfurther run-ins with the police?Clearly, Daryl Gates's words and actions create doubtabout his claim that the Rodney King incident was anaberration.
Public opinion polls in Los Angeles show themajority of people believe police brutality is common, andthey disapprove of the way Mr. Gates has done his job.
Mr. Gates's military style of policing is at odds withthat in the rest of the country, and it's about time policeleaders publicly repudiated it.
But the videotape of theLAPD brutality affects the credibility of all policeofficers.
It has cast a cloud over policing that won't belifted until police chiefs drop their own code of silence andspeak out against one of their own's peculiar philosophy ofpolicing.
