The South African concern, which controls 80% of the world diamond market through its London-based Central Selling Organization, sells a vast array of diamonds, varying in quality and size, dealers say.
"The diamond price increase was expected," said Jacques Zucker, of Lachowsky Zucker, diamond dealers in Antwerp, Belgium.
By changing the mix of diamonds that it sells to dealers several months ago, De Beers signaled to the market that it intended to raise quotes, he said.
"The price rise provides the necessary psychological lift to the market," said Peter Miller, a mining analyst at Shearson Lehman Securities in London.
Prices of one-carat D-flawless diamonds have risen to about $14,800 a carat from $12,000 at the beginning of the year, dealers said.
In 1985, at the low point of a deep slump, a top quality stone was $8,500 a carat, down from an average of $55,000 in 1980.
De Beers decided to raise prices because rough diamonds were already trading at a premium over its own quotes on the open market, said Andrew Lamont, a company spokesman.
In the first seven months of 1987, Japanese imports of polished diamonds surged 60% from the similar period last year to $777 million, he added.
The sharp appreciation of the yen reduced the cost of diamonds for Japanese buyers," Mr. Lamont says.
Demand for polished diamonds in the U.S., Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore, Korea, and the Philippines also raised exports of the leading diamond cutting and dealing centers, primarily Antwerp, Tel Aviv, Bombay and New York.
To meet growing orders from diamond dealers and cutters who supply the retail trade, De Beers sales of rough diamonds jumped to $1.56 billion in the first half of this year from $1.2 billion in the similar period in 1986.
Sales of $2.56 billion last year were the highest since the 1980 boom when De Beers turnover reached $2.72 billion.
Only about 10% to 20% of the diamonds are gems, but De Beers must continue to find new markets, they say.
De Beers surprised skeptics and revived trade from the slump in the first half of the decade by withholding stocks and pursuing an intensive marketing campaign.
An advertising and promotion budget which rose to $110 million this year from $43 million in 1980 helped raise world-wide sales of diamond jewelry to a record 49 million pieces valued at $24.6 billion last year.
In more than half a century of its existence, the Central Selling Organization, which includes as members black African state producers, has outlasted other commodity cartels by never cutting diamond prices.
The cartel controls most of the world's rough diamond market via a "pipeline" that stretches from mines in Africa to Australia to diamond dealers and cutters.
