Introduction:LJUBLJANA, Yugoslavia -- As federal army tanks and jetspounded the breakaway republic of Slovenia last week, thepin-striped brokers of the Ljubljana Stock Exchange defiedair-raid dangers and gathered in their sixth-floor tradingroom.
A full 100% of the corporate stocks --all two of them -- held steady or rose.
"Slovenes arenow beginning to see the costs of independence more clearlythan when we were at war.
"The two million people of this picturesque Alpine republicare waking up from their two-week nightmare sobered by theimplications of their intoxicating declaration of secessionfrom Yugoslavia on June 25.
Their bravado is undiminished,reflected in the almost unanimous feeling that there can beno going back now that blood has been spilled in defense ofindependence.
For the moment, the Slovenes are feeling lonely,unrecognized by the nations of the world.
Their considerabletrade with the rest of Yugoslavia, which helped make them thecountry's richest people, is vanishing.
Nationalismovershadows pragmatism, a quality that once distinguishedSlovenia from the rest of the often bewildering Balkans.
Almost every country on thecontinent has its own disenchanted minorities, from theSoviet Baltics to French Corsica, that could be encouraged bythe independence declarations of Slovenia and the neighboringrepublic of Croatia.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has heldup recent events here -- the Yugoslav army assault onSlovenia and the bitter ethnic clashes between Croats andSerbs -- as a warning to his land of what can happen whennationalism fractures a country.
While the European Community is counting on the peace planit brokered to defuse tensions (it calls for a three-monthperiod of negotiations in Yugoslavia), most governmentsconcede that the country's breakup is inevitable.
"This shunning by Western Europe, and the U.S., isparticularly disillusioning for a people who enjoy theirBMWs, Peugeots and Fiats, their shopping trips to Munich andVenice and their vacation chalets in the Alps.
The Slovenes,from their days in the Austro-Hungarian empire, have alwaysconsidered themselves to be Westerners.
Nestled between the Alps and the Adriatic, Slovenia becamethe most prosperous patch of communist Europe.
The per capitaannual income of nearly $7,000 is 10 times that of thesouthern regions of Yugoslavia.
"Okay, we must realize that we will be the less-developedpart of Europe," he says.
Slovenia's exportsof assembled cars, pharmaceuticals, refrigerators andfurniture account for a third of the total value of the goodsand services it produces.
"It's not size that makes a country successful," saysJosip Skoberne, head of the international division of theSlovene Chamber of Economy, citing EC-member Luxembourg, farsmaller in population and area than Slovenia.
"Finding new markets in the West is all the more urgentwith the certain decline in Slovenia's trade with the rest ofYugoslavia.
"Unbelievable," scoffs Mr. Skoberne as he reads a lettertelefaxed from the council of Banja Luka, a town with a largeSerbian population in the province of Bosnia-Hercegovina,decreeing that all Slovene-owned assets in the city are to beinventoried and frozen.
One of the major motivations behind Slovenia'sindependence grab was to free itself from the "Yugoslav risk"that hampered most attempts to attract foreign investment.
At the stock exchange, Mr. Veselinovic frets that hispost-independence plans to trade in gold, commodities andforeign currencies are jeopardized by the uncertaintyengulfing Slovenia.
