Introduction: A colossal tunneling machineis boring beneath the English Channel from the white cliffs ofDover, pursuing a dream born in Napoleon's time that is coming trueat last.
It will enable freight to travel on one train instead of beingshifted to trucks for a cross-channel ferry trip subject to weatherand shipping strikes.
For continental Europeans, accustomed to long-distance railtravel, the tunnel is but a small spur on a vast network stretchingto Moscow and beyond.
``People still question whether the tunnel will be complete inMay 1993 and that's ridiculous,'' says Kathy Watson, co-author of abook on the project.
``They're still arguing about whether it willintroduce rabies into this country, or let in terrorists.''
``They discuss it in terms of their being an island race, with achannel that has kept out invaders,'' she said in an interview.
State-owned British Rail will not commit itself to building ahigh-speed link from London to the tunnel in time to make thethree-hour journey a reality in 1993.
It intends instead to improveexisting tracks.
Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium that will own thetunnel, is urging British Rail to speed its plans.
Critics say thetangle of commuter lines in southeast England, so obsolete thattrains can be delayed by a sudden fall of autumn leaves, will delaytunnel traffic.
That means many loadswill have to be repacked or transferred to trucks unless thefacilities are rebuilt.
The grandiose project has been on and off the drawing boards formore than 200 years.
Digging began in 1882 but was halted by Britishfears of French invasion through the tunnel.
Britain's entry into the European Economic Community engendereda spirit of unity and the digging began again in 1974, but twoyears later a new British government shelved the project.
Also, the governments signed a tunnel treaty in February 1986and both would have to agree to cancellation.
``There's no way that politicians will cancel this project,''Kirkland said in an interview.
To get two is bloody nigh impossible.''
Money's power to move the tunnel forward was demonstrated inAugust, when drilling fell behind schedule.
The timetable calls for 650 feet a week and Kirkland is confidentof reaching it.
The tunnel, 80-130 feet below the seabed, was 2 miles into thechannel from this end Oct. 9, the most recent measurementavailable, and the French had progressed about 1,300 feet.
At its peak, the project will employ about 11,000 workers and 11tunneling machines.
A smaller service tunnel running between them now isbeing dug.
The tunnels are to be completed in 1991, then the railroadtracks will be laid.
Eurotunnel will run shuttle trains once everythree minutes at peak times between terminals near Folkestone andCalais, and British Rail and the Frenh state railroad will operatetrains from London and Paris.
