Like thousands of other farmers in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, they discovered that while cacao and coffee could give their families enough to eat, coca could make them rich.
Development workers, farmers and priests in the area say that the rebels have steadily streamed into the Upper Huallaga, a vast stretch of jungle northeast of Lima, and the biggest coca-growing zone in the world.
Until recently, the Shining Path had largely neglected the jungle.
While Washington has been quick to trumpet links between guerrillas and drug trafficking in other countries, U.S. officials downplay the connection between drugs and the Shining Path.
One reason is embarrassment that the U.S.-financed anti-drug effort may have pushed coca growers closer to the guerrillas.
The army was in force in the Upper Huallaga during the declared period of a state of emergency, from July 1984 to December 1985.
Government officials from the anti-drug police (UMOPAR) and the coca-eradication unit (CORAH) sent into the region to wipe out drug production were often confined to their barracks by the army; they simply were not allowed to carry on with their work.
The army continued its raids against the Shining Path in one part of the valley, but the drug growers were increasing production in several other parts while anti-drug officials were virtually kept under lock and key.
Anti-drug police, Upper Huallaga residents and Interior Ministry officials report that army officers received hundreds of thousands of dollars in payoffs from drug lords for their help in keeping anti-drug officials at bay.
Not only did it lose the power of authority in the region, but the number of troops in the Upper Huallaga Valley was dramatically reduced.
The troops were dispatched to other areas of the country, particularly in the mountainous Ayacucho region where guerrillas have been active.
But the narcos have now entrenched themselves in the towns of Tocache and Uchiza, where the police have repeatedly been blocked from entering by armed residents.
Nevertheless, the loss of army protection provided the Shining Path with a golden opportunity.
"The guerrillas now present themselves as the defenders of the coca farmers," says Segundo Ramirez, owner of Aucayacu's radio station.
In return for their protection, the guerrillas demand that farmers turn over one-fifth of their coca crop, according to UMOPAR officers, farmers and priests.
For three days they shut down the 50-mile road from Tingo Maria to Rio Uchiza -- the only continuous, paved road in the valley.
The relationship between the Shining Path and the people of the valley is not entirely cordial.
As part of its efforts to impart revolutionary "justice" among the people, the Shining Path has administered brutal reprisals against those peasants who do not fit its "new-man" profile.
During the January strike, the guerrillas killed an alleged thief and a seller of coca-paste cigarettes, according to a crop substitution program worker who works directly with the farmers in the area.
The rebels are also believed responsible for the murders of four homosexual men last November in Aucayacu.
On March 13 in El Triumfo, a small community near Aucayacu, they executed a 23-year-old man who spoke out against a guerrilla-organized activity. "
This is the Catch-22 that now confounds Peruvian and U.S. officials trying to eradicate both drugs and guerrillas from Peru.
