Introduction:BETHESDA, Md.
His vision blurred.
Gradually he lostcoordination, sometimes jerking uncontrollably.
A few monthslater, he died.
Under a microscope, parts of his brain,riddled with little holes, looked like a sponge.
Thus began another chapter in one of medicine's mostbizarre mysteries, a tale of sick sheep and mad cows,cannibals and Pennsylvanians, ancient life forms and a catnamed Max.
Now, after decades of detective work, medical sleuthsappear to be closing in on the molecular culprits behind thedisease.
Their dogged pursuit won't nail a public-healthenemy No.
Spongiform researchalready has raised questions about a cornerstone of biologyand spawned a Nobel Prize.
The uncanny nature of the disorder sometimes gripsscientists with a kind of obsessive fascination, notes NIHresearcher D. Carleton Gajdusek.
Recently the fascination hastaken on a more anxious cast as the disease has struck humansand animals with suspicious regularity in several places,underscoring a longstanding question: Do people get thedisease from animals?The question has burned with special intensity sincescrapie, the form of the disease in sheep, jumped to Britishcattle a few years ago after they were fed ground-up parts ofinfected sheep.
About 20,000 British cattle have beendestroyed since 1986 in hopes of eradicating the spongiform"mad cow" disease, which makes the animals jittery beforethey keel over.
Scientists agree, however, that the disease in animalsprobably poses little danger to people.
Yet sheep have never been stronglyimplicated in cases of the human form of the disease,Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, or CJD.
At least not until thePoltar journalist and two other people died of CJD at aboutthe same time in a rural, sheep-herding part of easternCzechoslovakia.
When Dr. Mitrova, a researcher at a Bratislava medicalinstitute, heard of the unusual cluster of cases, she decidedto investigate.
The local cuisineincludes a soup of sheep meat stewed in sheep milk.
One CJD victim even slept with a pet sheepuntil age 13.Now such coincidences seem like a serial killer's pattern.
Against all odds, CJD has struck again and again in the sameregion, called Slovakia -- 69 times since 1975, mainlygrouped in two areas.
Mitrova.
She has found evidence of scrapie in the area'ssheep.
Now villagers there call CJD "our sheep disease.
Indeed, CJDis a nefarious trickster; the first reported case of thedisease, which entered medical texts in the 1920s, reallywasn't CJD after all, scientists now believe.
And it usuallystrikes so rarely and randomly -- killing about one in amillion people world-wide each year -- that scientists didn'teven begin to suspect it was infectious until 1957.
"Gajdusek .
has an intelligence quotient up in the180s and the emotional immaturity of a 15-year-old," one ofhis mentors warned the Australians in a letter, and "won'tlet danger, physical difficulty, or other people's feelingsinterfere in the least with what he wants to do."
Soon kuru victims' brains started issuing from the heartof darkness to distant medical centers, compliments of Dr. Gajdusek.
He swapped axes and salt for autopsy rights,dissecting one victim with a carving knife by lantern-lightin a native hut during a howling storm, according to hisletters home.
He and the local doctor, Vincent Zigas, triedeverything from tranquilizers to hormones on kuru patients.
He had seen that lookbefore in scrapie, the sheep disease, and put in a call tothe NIH.
The discoveries confirmed along-suspected connection: The kuru outbreak sprang from aFore mourning ritual, in which relatives ate their deceasedkin's lightly cooked, and often kuru-infected, brains.
But the infectious agent continued to baffle scientists.
It somehow could hide in the brain for decades withoutcausing the usual signs of infection, such as fever.
Braintissue of infected animals could transmit the disease wheninjected into different animals' brains, yet microscopesrevealed no signs of infectious microbes.
And why did theagent sporadically appear in people with no known exposure?It seemed like "biological spontaneous combustion," says NIHresearcher Paul Brown.
Further studies showed the junkmainly contains a botched form of a naturally occurring brainprotein, sometimes called a prion.
When formed in a brain cell, a molecule of such stuff mightbe "like a bad apple in a barrel converting all the otherapples," says the NIH's Dr. Brown.
But a few of them got spongiform disease.
He also buried isolates in his garden for three years andfound they remained infectious.
Still, Dr. Brown and other scientists aren't much worriedabout mad cows because their animal studies show spongiformdisease is very hard to transmit orally.
Eating huge doses ofthe agent is required.
Perhaps the mad cows got such doses"every time they went to the feedbag," says Dr. Brown.
Kuruvictims apparently consumed similar mega-doses.
But it is worrisomebecause, like the Slovakian outbreak, it suggests a commonunderlying cause that could strike again.
During the past few months, the NIH team, working with Dr. Mitrova, has found a thread that for the first time may linkmany such CJD cases.
The discovery began when the scientistsferreted out a genetic defect in two U.S. brothers who haddied of CJD.
In itself, that was nothing new.
They were all of Eastern Europeandescent, suggesting people of similar ancestry might carrythe gene.
Drs.
Since then, the team has confirmed that many of theSlovakian CJD victims, and a cluster of Libyan-born Jewswhose tissues were preserved, carried the defect.
Thefindings suggest one of two things: Either the defect aloneproduces the deadly agent or it predisposes its carriers toget CJD when they are exposed to the agent.
The findings haveopened the door for early diagnosis and possible preventionof CJD.But they also have introduced a new riddle, says Dr. Gajdusek: Why has the genetic defect, which has apparentlyexisted for decades in some Eastern Europeans, turned deadlyonly in the past 15 years or so? "
Essentially, we're stuckwith another paradox," he adds.
"But there's nothing elseworth working on in science.
