Pinched between the Storm Creek and Clover-Mist blazes, anestimated 150 seasonal residents and dozens of tourists wereevacuated twice while hundreds of firefighters faced down walls offlame which threatened annihilation.
Eventually, millions ofdollars, thousands of man hours, and an early autumn snowfall savedthe towns.
No structures were lost within the towns' boundaries, but sevenresidences and five outbuildings were destroyed in the area.
One wag even changed the sign leading into town by adding asingle letter, rechristening it ``Cooked City.''
Their economically critical summer tourist season a bust and thehunting season crippled, the folks of Silver Gate and Cooke Citystraggled home in mid-September to pick up the pieces.
``The first thing most people around here did was go onvacation,'' said Patti Smith, owner with her husband, Bob, of theBearclaw Service and Cabins, a gas station and small motel.
The Smiths, who own the only photocopy machine for 30 miles inevery direction, found their small gas station and convenience storea mecca during the fires.
``It was crazy for a while,'' said Mrs. Smith, 33.
``We got sentout twice.
The first time I grabbed all the photo albums but forgotour wedding pictures.
The second time the sirens went off and we hadto leave, my parents had just arrived from North Platte, Neb., so weall went to Red Lodge (Mont.
Winter now cloaks Cooke City and Silver Gate, and only about 70year-round residents remain to weather the below-zero months.
Although postmistress Vicky Menuey keeps the office open fivedays a week, mail only arrives to ZIP code 59020 from the outsideworld on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.
``Nosmoke, no flames, and plenty of tourists.''
Because ofthe heavy day use, Smith works mostly at night in subzerotemperatures.
His wife keeps track of him by walkie-talkie.
The hottesttape in Cooke City this winter is ``Three Men and a Baby,'' forwhich there's a waiting list.
This winter, Mrs. Smith also has a newproject.
``I'm going to do my scrapbooks,'' she said, hauling out fromunderneath a counter a huge cardboard box overflowing with newspaperclippings and official fire bulletins, among them a firefighters'newsletter, ``The Griz Gazette,'' purporting to have spotted ElvisPresley on the fire line.
``Of course, a lot of it is wrong.''
Like nearly everybody else in Cooke City and Silver Gate, Mrs. Smith says she never wants to go through another summer like thelast one.
Although the 5.9 million acresburned in 1988 did not match the 28 million acres destroyed in 1926,the $583.8 million spent to fight 75,000 fires set a record.
Because of the unprecedented fire season which burned nearly 1.5million acres in the greater Yellowstone ecosystem, including705,000 acres within the national park, Mrs. Smith and her friendsand neighbors worry about what's happening underneath the blanket ofsnow this winter.
wondered Mrs. Smith.
In his 18 years of studying wildfires, Norum has come acrossseveral incidents where wildfires buried themselves in the roots oftrees and grasses and smoldered all winter only to pop up throughthe snow in the spring.
