One focus of the inquiry,however, is expected to center on whether there were unstableor gusty winds at the time of the crash.
The plane hit theground several miles south of the airport at about 11:40 a.m. EST yesterday, UAL Corp.'s United Airlines said.
Local news reporters quoted witnesses as saying that theplane appeared to nosedive into the earth.
Although it has always been difficult tomeasure the effect of crashes on travel, this accident comesjust as people were starting to get over fears of terrorismrelated to the Persian Gulf war.
This, in fact, may have been one reason why the load onthe United flight was light.
The jet, which can hold at least100 passengers, carried 20 passengers and a crew of twopilots and three flight attendants.
Yesterday's marks the third crash of a United jet in thepast three years.
In February 1989, the cargo door onUnited Boeing 747 burst open near Hawaii, tearing a gapinghole in the fuselage.
About two hours before yesterday's crash, the NationalWeather Service in Colorado Springs issued its first highwind warning for the area since January, according to JamesHall, a meteorological technician observer in ColoradoSprings.
Moments after the crash, the average wind speed was 23miles per hour, gusting to 32 mph, Mr. Hall said.
"A Federal Aviation Administration official said, "Therewere some reports of gusting winds but whether or not thathad any impact or whether there was any kind of mechanicalproblem, I can't speculate.
"Another FAA official said that although it is too early topinpoint the cause, "wind shear would be a major area ofinvestigation."
Wind shear is a sudden, violent shift in wind direction.
It can smash an airplane into the ground.
In Sunday's crash, thejetliner was a few miles from the airport and so should havebeen at a somewhat higher altitude.
Since then, the FAA and the industry have revamped pilottraining on wind shear and have devoted considerableresources to dealing with the hazard.
An eight-year-old girl who was playing nearby,was treated for a head injury and released.
The plane wasoperated by an engine manufactured by United TechnologiesCorp.
's Pratt &amp; Whitney division.
