Sawyer Air Force Base, officials said.
The crew was practicing landings after a seven-hour trainingflight when it crashed during one of its touch-and-go approaches,Peck said.
During such maneuvers, landing gears touch the ground butthe plane doesn't land.
All three sections of the plane burned on impact, said SeniorAirman Tim Sanders, a base spokesman.
Members of the crew suffered broken bones, but no one was burned,said Capt.
Mark Hartney, 29, an aircraft commander fromMulberry, Fla.; 1st Lt. Michael S. Debruzzi, 26, a pilot from NewBrighton, Minn.; Capt.
Anthony D. Phillips, 28, a radar navigatorfrom Folkston, Ga.; 1st Lt. James W. Herrmann, 30, a navigator fromSharpsville, Pa.; 1st Lt. Daniel McCarrick, 25, an electronicwarfare officer from Succasunna, N.J.; Airman 1st Class, Joseph A.Vallie, 20, a gunner from Stephenson, Mich.; Maj. William R.Kroeger, 52, an instructor pilot from Fountain Hills, Ariz.; and 1stLt.
Gregory C. Smith, 26, an upgrade pilot from Henning, Minn. Allwere based at Sawyer.
Ann Parent, a spokeswoman for Marquette General Hospital, saidHartney and Debruzzi were in fair condition, Phillips and Valliewere in stable condition, McCarrick was in satisfactory conditionand Kroeger was in serious condition.
Hartney was the aircraft commander, but Debruzzi also wasqualified to fly the plane, Bailey said.
``We are counting our blessings,'' Bailey said.
``You can putparts of a plane back together, but you cannot put people backtogether.''
Peck said a board of officers will investigate the accident,adding weather did not appear to be a factor in the crash.
``Crews have to be trained to fly at any time of the day or nightin any weather,'' he said.
The last B-52 wascommissioned in 1962.
In other accidents involving B-52s, a bomber was damaged when apilot aborted a takeoff and overshot a runway at Castle Air ForceBase in central California on Feb. 11.
No one was injured.
A B-52 bomber with radar problems crashed in Arizona'a MonumentValley in October 1984, killing two crew members, after its wingsclipped a mesa.
The Air Force has had more trouble recently with the B-52'ssuccessor, the B-1B bomber.
Although smaller than the B-52, the B-1Bcan fly at supersonic speeds and carry more bombs.
One of the $280million B-1Bs was destroyed after smashing onto a runway atEllsworth Air Force Base, S.D., during a training flight on Nov. 17.On Nov. 8, a B-1B crashed and burned in a field near Dyess Air ForceBase, Texas.
Six crewmen died and 10 were injured Oct. 11 when an Air Forcetanker en route from K.I.
The Air Force's investigation of the crash isincomplete.
Wurtsmith and Sawyer are Michigan's two SAC bases.
