Introduction: Among the 29 million Americans who voted for Democrat George McGovern in 1972was a 24-year-old black law student and one-time campus agitator namedClarence Thomas.
To friends, his is a story of courage, tofoes, a story of opportunism.
Racial anger, protest lyrics; The homespunhomilies of his grandfather, the ruler-slapping discipline of the nuns whotaught him at a Catholic school in segregated Savannah, Ga., the racial angerin the writings of Richard Wright and Malcolm X, the iconoclastic theories ofsuch academicians as Thomas Sowell and William Barclay Allen, even the protestlyrics of singer-songwriter Nina Simone -- all are parts of the story.
Asglimpsed in dozens of interviews and tens of thousands of pages of documentsthat Thomas has turned over to the Senate Judiciary Committee, theseinfluences helped shape a set of beliefs that are now the subject of bittercontroversy.
Ibelieve it is racist to act as though blacks are intellectual clones," he saidin a 1984 speech to black students at Yale Law School, where he earned his lawdegree.
"Even his close friends have trouble explaining why Thomas tooka different road.
As a youth, Clarence Thomas shared the liberal attitudesof many bright young black people who were born into a segregated America andcame of age after freedom rides, lunch room sit-ins and the 1964 Civil RightsAct began erasing the overt signs of racial discrimination.
As a Holy CrossCollege student in the turbulent 1960s, he joined black protesters, wore aberet and a leather jacket, and decorated his dormitory room with a poster ofMalcolm X.But Thomas came to see his college years as wrongheaded.
Hisrightward shift -- or, by his account, his circling back to conservativevalues -- began while he was a Yale law student from 1971 to 1974.Thomaswas admitted while an affirmative action program was in effect, although thereis no evidence that he would not have gotten in without it.
"His philosophy by that point was that he felt that thiscountry was affording people opportunities if they were willing to work andthat to rely on government was in the nature of servitude," said lawyer HarveyTettlebaum, who worked with Thomas.
His friends urged him not to shun a rare opportunity to makepolicy, and he accepted successive jobs as assistant secretary of educationfor civil rights and chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
A colorblind Constitution; In those jobs, Thomas began questioningpreferences in jobs and education for racial minorities who had historicallysuffered discrimination.
Thomas, who has declined to be interviewedsince his Supreme Court nomination, has not responded.
But he has offered anexplanation for his political change of heart.
"You all made me become Republican," he told his incredulousgrandparents. "
when you told me that it wasn't right to beg aslong as I could work and get it myself?
Remember when you told me thatif I ever amounted to anything it would be by the sweat of MY brow and MYelbow grease?
"And remember when you said you would rather starve than haveanyone give you something -- as long as you could work for it?
