Introduction:Senate Democrats promised today to scrutinize Supreme Court nominee ClarenceThomas' views on abortion and other divisive issues.
Conservatives applauded the selection and predicted liberals wouldhave trouble opposing the black judge.
Arlen Specter, R-Pa., noted that Metzenbaum did not pressJustice David Souter during confirmation hearings about his position onabortion.
"I do not think it is appropriate to ask a nominee the ultimatequestion as to how he is going to decide a specific case," Specter said.
"I will not support yet another Reagan-Bush Supreme Court nominee who remainssilent on a woman's right to choose, and then ascends to the court to weakenthat right," said Metzenbaum, the only member of the Judiciary Committee whovoted against Thomas' nomination to the Circuit Court of Appeals to theDistrict of Columbia.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said on NBC's "Today" showthat "literally nobody nominated for the Supreme Court should give his or herviews with regard to cases that might come up in the future.
"Civil rights groups have opposed Thomas on groundshe was insensitive to the concerns of minorities and the elderly as chairmanof the federal Equal Employment Opportunities Commission in the 1980s.
While someDemocrats immediately blasted the nomination, the party's biggest guns heldtheir fire.
SenateMajority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine; and Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass.,all promised a thorough review of the nomination.
Anunabashed conservative, he would succeed the court's leading liberal -- andfirst and only black justice.
Bush rejected suggestions that he choseThomas because he wanted to keep a black in that seat.
"The background of JudgeClarence Thomas is less important than his views and what they mean toprotecting our constitutional rights," said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill. Whenhead of the EEOC during the Reagan administration , Thomas "seemed to go out ofhis way to find ways to weaken some of the basic civil rights protections,"said Simon, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
""I don't want my vote to contribute to an increasingly largeand conservative anti-choice majority on the Supreme Court," said Sen. AlanCranston, D-Calif. Thomas said he looked forward to the confirmationprocess "and to be an example to those who are where I was, and to show themthat, indeed, there is hope.
; WHAT'S NEXT?Now that President Bush hasnominated Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, the next step is up to theSenate.
The Senate Judiciary Committee is expected to begin confirmationhearings in September, after the August recess.
After the committeemakes a recommendation, the nomination will be voted on by the full Senate.
