Introduction: Exxon salvage crews successfully refloated the stricken tanker Exxon Valdez on Wednesday as the former captain of the vessel surrendered to authorities in New York to face criminal charges in the massive oil spill.
Hazelwood's lawyer said he had not decided whether to waive extradition proceedings and return to Alaska to face the charges; Hazelwood was not required to enter a plea Wednesday.
Hazelwood left Alaska before local authorities could interview him, and had been pursued since Saturday on a fugitive warrant on three misdemeanor charges: operating a watercraft while intoxicated, reckless endangerment and negligent discharge of oil at sea.
These misdemeanors are of such a magnitude that has never been equaled, at least in this country," Rohl said.
"We have a man-made destruction that has not been equaled, probably, since Hiroshima."
FBI officials in Washington say they also are investigating whether Hazelwood could be charged with felony violations of the Clean Water Act, which prohibits negligent discharge of pollutants into navigable waters.
No people have been killed or even seriously injured by the spill, but oil has seriously disrupted the rich Prince William Sound fishing industry.
The state of Alaska condemned Exxon's cleanup on Wednesday and asked the Coast Guard to take over the effort.
Alaska Gov.
Steve Cowper said the Coast Guard should be better able to handle coordination and management of the cleanup than Exxon, which he said was too bureaucratic. "
You need a military system to get things done," the governor said.
Although Cowper said he did not want to be "extremely critical" of Exxon, a letter sent to the Coast Guard by a state environmental official said Exxon had been unresponsive. "
Exxon has failed to provide .
President Bush earlier had sent a team of high-level officials to Valdez and determined that federal management of the cleanup was not necessary.
"We gathered all the resources and organized the cleanup.
We think the most effective and efficient way to carry out this project is (for Exxon) to continue," Beathard said.
The tanker refloat went unexpectedly well.
Almost 1 million barrels of oil were pumped from the Exxon Valdez to three smaller tankers over the last 11 days, and the salvage process began as soon as the last of the tankers left for Southern California refineries on Tuesday.
The air forced out some of the 998,000 barrels of sea water that had been pumped into the stricken tanker as oil was removed.
He added that this technique also would produce a pressurized buffer of clean sea water between the oil left in the tanker -- about 15,000 to 20,000 barrels -- and the once-pristine waters off Valdez.
However, flow through the Alaskan pipeline returned to its normal daily flow of 2.1 million barrels Wednesday, the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. said.
Portland, Ore., was the company's first choice, but it backed away from that option after Oregon Gov.
Cowper for fouling Prince William Sound, Exxon said it would consider having the tanker repaired in the Far East -- Japan, Korea or Singapore.
Even as it made that concession, the company denied its ship would endanger any port it visited for repair.
Staff writer Larry B. Stammer in Valdez contributed to this report.
