Introduction:Congress has been dismayingly inconsistent in its votingon gun-control legislation this year, first passing the BradyBill, then moving in the opposite direction by defeating aprovision to ban certain assault weapons and ammunition.
"They cite the Constitution's Second Amendment and argue itprohibits effective national regulation of the privateownership of guns.
But there are strong grounds for arguing that the SecondAmendment is no barrier to gun-control legislation.
The best clues to the meaning of the key words and phrasesare in debates in the First Congress of the United States.
The Members of that Congress were the authors of the SecondAmendment.
A constitutional amendment calling for theprohibition of standing armies in time of peace was proposedby six state ratifying conventions.
Virginia's version, latercopied by New York and North Carolina, brought together threeelements in one article -- affirmation of a right to beararms, reliance on state militia, and opposition to a standingarmy:"That the people have a right to keep and bear arms; thata well-regulated militia, composed of the body of the peopletrained to arms, is the proper, natural, and safe defense ofa free state; that standing armies, in times of peace, aredangerous to liberty, and therefore ought to be avoided.
These eventually became the Billof Rights.
"In this version, "bearing arms" must mean "to rendermilitary service," or why else would there have to be anexemption for religious reasons?
The right of the people to serve in the militia.
This militia amendment was referred to a congressionalcommittee, and came out of committee in this form:"A well regulated militia, composed of the body of thepeople, being the best security of a free state, the right ofthe people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; butno person religiously scrupulous shall be compelled to beararms.
"Two significant changes had been made: first, the phrase"to render military service in person" was replaced by thephrase "to bear arms," again indicating that they are twoways to say the same thing; second, an explanation was added,that the "militia" is "composed of the body of the people.
The debate focused exclusively onthe conscientious objector provision.
"Certain explanations were lost or buried in thislegislative process: that the right to bear arms meant theright to serve in the militia; that just about everybody wasincluded in the militia; and that the amendment as a wholesought to minimize if not eliminate reliance on a standingarmy by emphasizing the role of the state militia, whichwould require that everyone be ready to be called to serve.
But what about the private right "to keep and bear arms,"to own a gun for self-defense and hunting?
Wouldn't that right go without saying?
Almost everyone also owned a dog for the samepurposes.
There are uncountablenumbers of rights not enumerated in the Constitution.
"Every free able-bodied white male citizen" (it was 1792,after all) was required by the act to "enroll" in the militiafor training and active service in case of need.
But the aspect that was raised to the levelof constitutional concern was the public interest in thosearms.
What does this mean for the question of gun control today?Well, for example, it means that Congress has theconstitutional power to enact a Militia Act of 1992, torequire every person who owns a gun or aspires to own one to"enroll" in the militia.
Standards could be set for purchase or ownership of guns, andpenalties could be established.
Why not avail ourselves of theSecond Amendment remedy?
