Introduction:Over the past two years, the Ventura County district attorney's office in four separate incidents has declined to prosecute suspects who contended that they were victims of police brutality while being arrested for various offenses by Oxnard officers, records show.
In a fifth and more recent incident, the district attorney's office declined to file a charge of assaulting an officer against an Oxnard man who says he and several other guests at a June 15 private party were beaten by Oxnard police.
Two of the incidents have led to an investigation by the Police Department's internal affairs division.
Atty.
In each of the four cases, Brodie said, his office did not prosecute because it found that police did not provide enough evidence to prove the charges "beyond a reasonable doubt."
But Jean Farley, a supervisor for the Ventura County public defender's office, said it is extremely rare for the district attorney's office not to prosecute a suspect who is accused by police.
The district attorney's office may have declined to prosecute the suspects because police brutality has been alleged, she said.
He said, however, that the decisions by the district attorney's office not to prosecute the suspects do not reflect poorly on the department.
Flores and his brothers, Alex, 19, and Luis Jr., 24 -- all of whom suffered gashes and scrapes on their heads and bodies -- said the officers beat them without provocation.
Police had arrested Flores on suspicion of assaulting an officer and of resisting arrest but the district attorney's office decided two weeks later to prosecute Flores on the five misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest. "
Atty.
Donald Gran, who declined to elaborate.
Police Chief Robert Owens has ordered an investigation into the incident.
In an incident April 7, Sergio E. Gonzalez, 19, accused Oxnard officers of ordering a police dog to attack him before he was arrested.
In a suit filed June 29, Gonzalez said he was standing on Sunkist Circle when the dog attacked him, biting him on the arm and left shoulder.
Edward M. Fox, an attorney representing Gonzalez, said his client, a gardener, might suffer some permanent injury to his right arm.
According to a police report filed by Officer Michael Cole, police were sent to a parking lot outside the Oxnard Moose Lodge to investigate a report of an altercation between several men after a wedding reception.
Cole's report said Gonzalez was found hiding in the parking lot and "was bit by a police service dog during the arrest."
But the district attorney's office declined to file any charges because the police report failed to show that Gonzalez was involved in the altercation, Brodie said.
In a third incident, Louis M. Cornett, a retired teacher and licensed gun dealer, said he was beaten on Oct. 20 while in custody at Oxnard police headquarters.
Cornett said the altercation began as he was returning home after scouting out a site for quail hunting near Santa Maria.
Officer Robert Camarillo said in a police report that Cornett was arrested in the 3600 block of Taffrail Road on suspicion of brandishing a weapon, resisting arrest and possessing a loaded firearm.
Camarillo said in the report that he stopped Cornett while investigating a complaint of a man waving a gun from a car and threatening youngsters packed into another vehicle.
But a lawsuit against Camarillo filed May 8, 1989, alleges that while in custody at the police station, Camarillo shoved and punched Cornett in the mouth. "
The district attorney's office declined to file charges against Cornett because, Brodie said, there was insufficient evidence to prove that Cornett brandished a gun.
In a suit filed against the city Nov. 14, 1989, the Police Department and officers Jana Younger, Fred Sedillos and James Struck, Guzman-Flores contends that he was grabbed from behind by Younger while in the alley.
But Flores' lawyer, Sherrie L. McCracken, said the report states that officers were at the shop responding to a complaint of a man with a gun.
Flores was handcuffed and shoved to the ground, causing Sedillos to trip and fall on him, according to the suit.
Flores was arrested on suspicion of resisting arrest and obstructing an officer.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Flores but later dismissed all charges during Flores' trial because police failed to turn over a recording of a dispatcher's call requesting that officers investigate the incident at the motorcycle shop, McCracken said.
McCracken said Flores never struggled with the officers until after he was placed in the choke-hold.
In another incident, Luis C. Luna, 50, alleges in a complaint filed with the city on June 27, 1989, that he was beaten by three officers near a restaurant in Port Hueneme.
Luna said in an interview that he, his wife and several friends were leaving the restaurant on July 16, 1988, when an Oxnard police car pulled up in front of the group.
When he asked the officer why he was being shoved, Ruggiero told him that he was under arrest, according to the complaint.
"They used forcible brutality by hitting me with the baton on my elbow, knees and back, forcing me to drop down on the sidewalk with my face slammed against the pavement," Luna said in the complaint.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Luna, but in September, 1988 -- before his trial began -- all charges against him were withdrawn for lack of evidence, Brodie said.
Luna had asked the city for $50,000 for medical expenses and to compensate for "humiliation suffered in public."
