But he comes to Washington well prepared for thekind of back-room political arm-twisting that will be required to persuade adivided Congress to pass it.
William Daley is younger brother and chief adviser to Chicago's mayorRichard M Daley and offspring of the legendary Democratic machine 'Boss',the late Richard J Daley.
Unlike his hot-tempered and very public brother,45-year-old Bill Daley is a smooth-talking behind-the-scenes operator withimportant connections in Washington and long-standing ties with organisedlabour.
Most recently, he arranged a posh Chicago dinnerfor the president that raised Dollars 1m (Pounds 670,000).However, Mr Daley's appointment to chair the White House's task force on theNorth America Free Trade Agreement is not a cosy political payoff.
Recentpolls show that as many as two-thirds of the American people do not supportNafta, and grassroots opposition fuelled by labour groups is growing.
Mr Clinton himself reserved his support for the deal, negotiated underGeorge Bush's administration, until side agreements dealing withenvironmental and labour issues were reached last month.
Many Democrats inCongress, including some in the powerful Illinois delegation, areuncommitted.
Mr Daley was chosen for the job, Chicago observers say, because he hasproven he can sway votes and is willing to take the risk of losing acontroversial battle. '
Mr Daley's talents have beensummoned, insiders say, to convince moderate Democrats to back theagreement.
Theadministration counts 125 Republicans in favour of the agreement.
Clintonally and fellow Chicago Democrat, Mr Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the Houseways and means committee, is expected to deliver the 20 Democrats on hiscommittee.
By rough count, Mr Daley will have to marshall 73 votes from Democraticrepresentatives of states standing to gain the most from the agreement:those along the border with Mexico and those with big agricultural, consumerproduct, or manufacturing export interests.
His Chicago-style back-room muscle will be an invisible counterweight to thepublic tactics of Nafta's most prominent opponent, Mr Ross Perot.
Mr Perot'spopulist anti-Nafta campaign touts the 'giant sucking sound' that will beheard as Nafta-loosened jobs flow south of the Texas border.
Bill Daley is like a Stealth bomber.
Mr Clinton may be banking on Mr Daley's union ties to help the Nafta effort.
