Now, in the wake of that firestorm, local firefighters are looking up atthe hills that surround this area and wondering not whether, but only when andwhere.
"I know it's there," said Saratoga Fire Chief Ernest Kraule.
"Everyfire chief -- there's 12 of us in this county -- knows it's there.
"Thedanger is in the Saratoga foothills, where Kraule's department has battlednine deliberately set fires since June -- most recently Oct. 19, the same dayOakland firefighters thought they had contained a brush fire that a day laterblossomed into the deadly firestorm.
It's in the mountain communities thatstraddle Highway 9 in Santa Cruz County, isolated by weak bridges that won'tsupport some firetrucks and connected by a two-lane road that will hinderescape.
It's in Los Altos Hills, where residents in 1984 repealed anordinance requiring fire-retardant roofs; a year later, a fire destroyed 100acres and 12 homes, many of which have been rebuilt -- with the same flammableshake roofs.
Andthe risk is increasing, as cramped Bay Area residents push farther into thehills and canyons in search of living space and rural atmosphere.
Privacy's high priceHaving pushed intothese areas, city dwellers don't understand that the wooded seclusion andnatural beauty exact a cost in fire protection, rescue workers complain.
"Those are the risks you take when you live in an arealike this," said Dean Lucke, chief of the forestry department's SanMateo-Santa Cruz ranger unit.
"In general, firefighters say, the heavily wooded Santa CruzMountains are more susceptible to major fires than the grass-covered easternfoothills.
If there's an area that hasthe significant potential for disaster, that's one.
"Codes rarely enforced;  In the hills, nearly every home is surrounded by thick brush or dense woods.
By nottrimming dense brush, he said, some homeowners are "virtually signing a deathwarrant.
""We could have a fire going fromrooftop to treetop to rooftop to treetop in any number of areas in this city,if the weather conditions are right," said San Jose Fire Chief Robert Osby.
The lesson of the Oakland hills, firefighters say, is to contain andextinguish even the smallest fires as quickly as possible.
But, often, thatmeans firefighters have to overcome narrow roads, weak bridges, inadequatewater pressure and gridlock from fleeing residents.
Challenge forfirefightersMany of the South Bay's most vulnerable areas -- such asRedwood Estates above Los Gatos and Emerald Lake Hills above Redwood City --began as colonies of summer homes, a handful of secluded cottages strung alongnarrow winding roads.
"On a good day, trying to maneuver fireapparatus on those roads is tough," said Steve Cavallero, a battalion chieffor the Redwood City Fire Department, which covers a portion of Emerald LakeHills.
"An estimated 25,000 people live inthe communities along Highway 9 between Santa Cruz and Boulder Creek, thecurvy, two-lane road that would be the only way out in the case of a majorfire.
Ed Ekers, chief of the Santa Cruz city fire department, worriesabout sending his trucks through "a tunnel of fire" if flames were ever tospread across the canopy of trees above Highway 9.Will there be water?Even if they can reach a blaze, firefighters know there may not be any waterto fight it.
In Oakland, water pressure dropped as electricity failures shutoff pumps and thousands of open hydrants and water connections quickly drainedreservoirs.
And for everycommunity, like Saratoga, that requires fire-retardant roofs, there areothers, like Los Altos Hills, unwilling to suffer even that inconvenience.
building code, they say, 'Don'teven bring it up,' " Landrum said.
"I would hate to say it, but I'danticipate another Oakland."
