The media were there, as before, chronicling a news conference.
The new element was the pervasive skepticism that now attends Johnson's boasts.
Johnson will at last get his chance to do that.
It has been two years since Johnson, then world record-holder at 100 meters, was stripped of his gold medal after testing positive for anabolic steroids at the Seoul Olympics.
And so the questions begin: What can Johnson do when not assisted by performance-enhancing drugs? "
Once he returns to the sport, and if he returns a winner, all is forgiven," said Paul Gaines, assistant meet director for the Hamilton Spectator Indoor Games, the Canadian meet to be held Jan. 11 that will mark Johnson's return to competition.
You hear grumblings among media types and in some circles of the sport, but you have to give the guy the benefit of the doubt. "
When this happened, it was a bitter disappointment for everyone in the sport to acknowledge that the No.
1 athlete in the sport was using drugs.
With the humility and shame that has been reflected on him, people tend to be more open minded about it.
To some in track and field that represents a contradiction in terms.
"I want to take back the titles and the records I have been deprived of," the Associated Press quoted Johnson as saying.
By strengthening training, I will be 100% by January.
I have decided to start again to show everybody I'm still the best.
I'm convinced I can set a new world record."
BIG MONEY Promoters of indoor meets this season doubt that Johnson will regain his records, but they hope that fans will turn out in huge numbers to watch him try.
Indeed, in a season that holds the promise of high performance levels in general (as athletes peak for the world indoor championships in Seville, Spain, in March), Johnson's return to competition might help rejuvenate a sport in need of public interest.
"I think honestly, you have to figure that a lot of it is curiosity," Franken said.
"You'll get people who don't care about track, and you may attract back people who have quit coming to track.
Ben sort of transcends the sport, and, God knows, we need someone to transcend the sport."
He will be paid $60,000 for a meet in Stockholm.
But American meet directors say they can't pay that kind of money, especially for an unproven runner.
"If he's eligible to compete, to me, Ben Johnson is an attraction," said Ray Lumpp, meet director for the indoor meet at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J.. "I'd like to have Ben Johnson regardless of how he runs.
But how well he's running will determine his value.
You're only as good as your last race, and the fans know that."
Howard Schmertz of the Millrose Games in New York has an interest in Johnson, but perhaps not the budget.
"There is a lot of interest in seeing whether this fellow is a truly great runner or if he is what Carl Lewis said he is, a fair runner who got there by taking drugs," Schmertz said.
As far as the money, I expect a lot of big stars and I'm going to have a lot of problems giving out (big appearence fees).
If you give him $10,000 and people are beating him, you could have problems."
Johnson reportedly will be paid $10,000 (Canadian) for the meet in Hamilton, a figure that has caused some jealousy among his peers.
"How many heavy hitters can a meet afford?"
he said.
"There are very few secrets among athletes, especially when there's X dollars given to one athlete."
Right now, I can't think of anybody who would arouse as much interest as Ben Johnson. "
It would be ironic if Johnson becomes the star who revitalizes indoor track and field after being blamed for the steady decline of sponsor interest in outdoor track. "
There has been damage to the sport and people want to blame Ben personally for that damage," Gaines said.
"We are very cognizant of the fact that people are looking upon his return with something like skepticism and animosity.
To what extent, we don't know."
Some meet directors report concern that longtime sponsors will be reluctant to be associated with a meet that has Johnson as its marquee athlete, given Johnson's former association with anabolic steroids.
Schmertz, too, has given the matter some thought.
"I've had that thought myself, paying him that much money," he said.
Now he's got a lot of notoriety.
I don't know how the public is going to react.
Are they going to treat him as someone who has paid his penalty and now he's clean?
I don't know.
"It's kind of perplexing, isn't it?," Kern said.
"I'm not God.
I can't say that it's wrong, especially when deep down I know Johnson's not the only one who's ever taken drugs. "
"We do not allow two-horse races."
Futerman limits Johnson's contact with the media, saying "Ben has said all he has to say.
We don't need any more media."
However, it was Futerman who offered to permit a British journalist to interview Johnson -- if he paid $10,000 and submitted his questions in advance.
Johnson gave an in-depth interview to the German magazine, Sport, but only after being paid.
He still is awaiting word from the Canadian Olympic Assn., which placed a lifetime ban on Johnson that prohibited him from representing Canada in the Olympic Games.
That may go a long way to easing Johnson back into a sport that disowned him almost as swiftly as he burst on the scene.
Similarly, Johnson was erased from track and field's record books.
The rule stripped Johnson of his world record of 9.83 in the 100 meters and 6.41 in the indoor 60 meters.
Already gone was the 9.79 race from the Olympics.
The records are gone but not forgotten.
If the public will pay to watch Johnson is another question.
Said Lumpp of the Meadowlands, "You don't have just a track and field story here, you have a human interest story.
Will he be the same Johnson?
I don't know, but people are willing to find out."
