His idea of astrict two-year time limit on welfare cheques appealed to voters (especially'Reagan democrats') not just as a way of cutting government spending andthus reducing taxes, but as a solution to the nation's most pressing socialproblems.
In the American mind, welfare has become synonymous with such evils as urbandecay, fatherless children, drug abuse and violent crime.
By promisingradical welfare reform, Mr Clinton was sending a powerful subliminalmessage: he would wage war on all the diseases that are ravaging urbansociety.
Since becoming president, Mr Clinton has barely mentioned the word welfare,raising fears that his grandiose promise will prove as cynical as formerPresident George Bush's 'read my lips: no new taxes' pledge.
The White House insists that welfare reform is not forgotten but has justhad to take its turn behind two even more urgent priorities: the deficitreduction plan finally approved this month and the healthcare reformscheduled for September.
It claims both measures will help shift people offwelfare by 'making work pay.
'The budget advanced this cause by expanding the earned income tax credit (akind of negative income tax).
If healthcare reform guarantees health insurance for all workers,welfare recipients will no longer be able to reject jobs on the grounds thatthey stand to lose their health care benefits.
In addition, the administration promises to bolster the economic position ofwelfare mothers by strictly enforcing laws requiring absent fathers tosupport their children financially.
Such measures should help.
But they are hardly going to solve America'swelfare problem, which differs substantially from that in Europe.
In keeping with Franklin Roosevelt's dictum that a permanent dole is 'anarcotic, a subtle destroyer of the human spirit', the US has never providedpermanent welfare support for single, able-bodied adults.
When pundits talkof a 'culture of welfare' they are referring mainly to the Dollars 20bnspent on Aid for Families with Dependent Children, a benefit received by 5msingle-parent families.
The objection is not that some families instraitened circumstances need AFDC as a short-term prop, but that half ofthose on welfare behave as though they have a meal ticket for life.
Once peopleaccept that benefits are not going to be paid indefinitely, they argue,behaviour will change.
Teenagers will stop having babies and startrecognising the economic advantages of marriage.
Those whose welfarebenefits expire will face a stark choice: accept low-paid employment or handover children for adoption.
According to one advocate, this would amount to replacing thewelfare state by the 'work ethic state'.This solution is more appealing than a mere cessation of benefits.
Mr Clinton could tighten the definition of 'employable', so as to includemothers with children under the age of three, and set more demandingworkfare participation targets, for example that 50 per cent of welfarerecipients should be working or in training by the year 2000.
