As bankers and finance ministers gathered in Washington this weekend for thespring meetings of the bank and International Monetary Fund, there was noshortage of advice.
The bank is also under pressure to follow the example of Mr JacquesAttali's European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and attachstrict political conditions to its loans.
More than 110m Third World children lack access even to primary education.
Horrific inequality abounds.
What kind of bank will Mr Preston inherit from his predecessor, Mr BarberConable?
It is not an impressive bureaucracy,' saysMr John Williamson, a senior fellow at the Institute for InternationalEconomics. '
The morale of staff is lousy,' says Mr Charles Flickner, asenior analyst on the Senate Budget Committee and close observer of thebank.
Although nowwell-liked (partly for championing causes such as women's rights in theThird World), many observers say he never fully recovered from a rocky startinvolving a divisive internal reorganisation of the bank.
Mr Percy Mistry, a scholar at Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford, and formersenior adviser at the bank, says it suffered from 'presidential failure'during the 1980s.
Mr Robert McNamara, a forceful chief executive in the1970s, built a presidential institution that responded to firm leadershipfrom the top.
Mr Preston's first challenge, says Mr Mistry, will be to wrest control ofthe bank from Messrs Stern and Qureshi; his second, to prune legions of'useless advisers' and install managers with real-world experience.
What kind of development legacy will Mr Preston inherit?
In spite of recentprogress in a few countries, such as Mexico, the past decade has been one ofrelative failure.
Many Third World countries have gone backwards.
Real percapita incomes have declined substantially in sub-Saharan Africa and theMiddle East, and mildly in Latin America.
The biggest drag on growth is the huge debt accumulated in the 1970s andearly 1980s.
Many optimists see the debt reduction strategy launched by MrNicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary, in 1989, as a 'final solution' tothe debt crisis.
Under the plan official agencies assume some of the burdenof developing countries' private debts on condition that they implementmarket-oriented economic reforms.
'The Brady plan is enough,' says Mr Williamson, if developing countries arewilling to embrace reform and if it is matched by greater forgiveness ofofficial debt.
Officials such as Mr David Mulford of the US Treasury say therecent forgiveness of about half of Poland's official debt will not set aprecedent for other debtors.
In the long run it willbe impossible to isolate Poland,' he says.
'But why was a Brady-type solution not launched much earlier?
(The IMF was equally short-sighted.
)As incoming president, Mr Preston must review the bank's strategies forpromoting development.
The main innovation of the 1980s was a switch fromproject lending to 'structural adjustment' lending.
He says thebank was naive to expect entrepreneurs to respond to the austerity ofadjustment by increasing investment.
How can the bank do better in the 1990s?
One problem is that it has lostleverage over many Third World governments.
The maturing of bank programmesand the failure to expand lending much in the 1980s has led to a markedshrinkage in its net transfers to developing countries.
According to MrLawrence Summers, the bank's chief economist, net transfers over the nextfive years will be about Dollars 2 per person in the developing worldcompared with Dollars 9 (in current prices) in the late 1970s.
For the largenumber of countries that do not qualify for concessional loans, the net flowwill be negative.
It also says 60 per cent of EBRDresources must be devoted to the commercial sector - private businesses andstate concerns in the process of privatisation.
Should the bank's charter beamended?Direct parallels between the bank and the EBRD are dubious.
If strict politicalconditionality had been imposed in the past, the bank could not have lent toa development star such as South Korea.
Most analysts, however, say the bank should tighten up a little.
Mr Flicknerof the Senate Budget Committee says the issue is not whether to insist onWestminster-style democracy but whether the form of governance is such that'loans will benefit the majority of the people'.
Should a significant chunk of the bank's loans be made direct to the privatesector?
Mr Conable, to his credit, is resisting the US Treasury's pressure.
In reality, much of the most badly-needed investment is inspheres such as infrastructure, health care and education where governmentsplay a dominant role even in industrialised countries.
Advocates of a switch to direct support of the private sectorare surely not arguing for public subsidies for Third World entrepreneurs;but if subsidies are ruled out, why should the bank's judgment of marketrisk be more reliable than that of private lenders in the west?There are alternative recipes for fostering faster Third World development.
During the 1980s the bank placed great faith in free market nostrums.
Itwanted to impose on developing countries policies that had become recentlyfashionable in the industrialised world.
But the notion that economicliberalisation alone is sufficient is increasingly questioned.
'Liberalisation matters,' says Mr Williamson at the Institute forInternational Economics, 'but education is more important.'
Mr Feinberg at theOverseas Development Council broadly agrees: the bank has got to find a wayof 'melding equity and efficiency as it promotes development'.The challenge for Mr Preston is clear: put the sterile ideological battlesof the 1980s behind the bank and develop policies that put greater emphasison the formation of human capital.
Domestic investment as % of GNP                                  1975-82         1983-90All developing countries            26.7            23.6Africa                              26.4            19.4Middle East 26.3            23.4Latin America &amp; Caribbean           23.3            18.3Asia                                27.9            28.9 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source:
