Introduction:   Black Americans suffer six times more tuberculosisthan whites do, and one important reason appears to be a geneticsusceptibility to the disease, according to a study today.
The research found that when living conditions are identical,black people are twice as likely as whites to get infected with theTB bacteria.
Stead, a tuberculosis specialist at the Arkansas Department ofHealth, discovered the racial difference while analyzing healthstatistics from nursing homes and prisons.
``It's a very intriguing finding,'' commented Dr. GeorgeComstock of Johns Hopkins University.
``I never quite believeanything until somebody replicates it.
At the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,Dr.
George Curlin called the findings ``plausible and provocative.''
However, he added: ``I'm scared to death that people are goingto say this explains it all and forget everything else.
Stead's study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine,was based largely on a review of 25,398 elderly people who werefree of TB infection when they were admitted to Arkansas nursinghomes.
Prison data from Arkansas and Minnesota also found that blackinmates were twice as likely as white prisoners to catch thebacteria while incarcerated.
Another soon-to-be published study reports the discovery of aracial difference in the way blood cells respond to the TBbacteria, which could help explain why blacks seem to be more proneto tuberculosis.
About 22,000 cases of tuberculosis are reported annually in theUnited States, resulting in 1,700 deaths.
In the population atlarge, tuberculosis is about six times as common among blacks aswhites.
The disease, which attacks thelungs, has long been associated with poor, crowded livingconditions.
In homes where the initialsource of the disease was white, 17 percent of blacks and 12percent of whites caught the infection.
This phase of the study also suggests, however, that infectedwhites are more potent spreaders of the infection than are blacks.
Stead speculated that whites have evolved better defensesagainst TB, because the bacteria has long been common in Europe andparts of Africa north of the Sahara, but is traditionally rare insub-Saharan Africa.
``This helps explain why black people are more susceptible totuberculosis than are white people,'' said Crowle.
