Threedeputies were charged with stealing credit cards from elderly people.
The spotlight that hadbeen trained on the police department and its 8,300 officers now has widenedto take in the equally large sheriff's department.
But after years ofboasting that their methods were models in policing, both departments arefacing pressure to revolutionize their tactics to better fit thisfirst-of-its-kind metropolis.
"We are a multiracial, multicultural citymore than any other," said Ramona Ripston, head of the American CivilLiberties Union of Southern California.
"If something can be worked out here,it would be really, I think, a model that can be exported.
"There's got to be a revolution in American policing,"McNamara said.
"But some observerssay that, for a variety of political and social reasons, the possibility forsubstantive change on L.A. law's front lines is scant.
Low level ofinterest"There isn't the level of interest among voting people, peoplewith power, people with influence," ACLU spokesman Joe Hicks said.
The King beating led to an investigation of the policedepartment by an independent commission that found racism, brutality,inadequate discipline, mismanagement and a "siege mentality" pitting officersagainst the community.
At the street level, it suggested officers spend more time out of their patrolcars, work more with community groups and ease up on the common practice ofmaking suspects lie face down on the ground even when they pose no apparentthreat.
The city council is reviewing the recommendations, some of which --for instance, a term limit for the chief -- require voter approval.
But because Block iselected, his is the last word.
"The sheriff has said that his department continually re-examinesitself and launched several Christopher Commission recommendations before thecommission even existed -- but that it can't do everything.
'A last-resortmechanism'"Law enforcement, and I'm going beyond the sheriff's department,did not create the social conditions out there from which the violence isspringing," he said.
"People are looking at the criminal justice system todayas being the linchpins of government.
Andfail they have.
There are 950 known street gangs with morethan 99,300 members in the county, according to the sheriff's department.
Agreeing that law enforcement is not the answer to all of society's failures,critics say Block is missing the point.
"Police brutality (or) racism isnot a social problem, it's a law enforcement lack of leadership," the HooverInstitution's McNamara said.
'Window dressing' predictedOn the city side, they worry that theChristopher Commission recommendations will be diluted by the time the citycouncil and voters are finished with them.
"On the county side, critics say Block's position as anelected official insulates him from the kind of independent review the citywas able to order for the police department.
