Introduction:   John Hatch, founder of the non-profit Foundationfor International Community Assistance, promotes village banking toencourage private enterprise in the Third World.
What he foreseesis a body blow to world poverty through bootstrap economics.
John Hatch says he hit upon his Third World``poverty vaccination'' while panic-stricken on a flight to Bolivia.
He had decided he could not comply with requirements of aconsulting job he had accepted from the Agency for InternationalDevelopment, and he was scrambling to come up with a suitablesubstitute.
``I had my calculator out and Iwas sketching this thing and I was doing numbers, and I arrived inLa Paz with a full-blown concept.''
What he had stumbled upon was village banking, a system ofinvestment using small revolving loans to poor women to financetheir private enterprise, allowing them to create savings whilepaying interest and qualifying for bigger loans.
The series of loans, starting at $50, is renewable over threeyears to a ceiling of $300, allowing recipients to reach a level atwhich they can qualify for commercial credit.
There is ``almost a 100 percent guarantee'' that increasedincome for women will go into improvements in their children'swelfare, Hatch says.
``We teach severely poor mothers how to create their ownself-managed bank, which provides them with self-employment loans,provides them with savings incentives and provides them with asupport group of mothers like themselves, so that they are allattacking change at the same time.''
Catholic Relief Services entered a five-year, $1 million jointventure a year ago with the U.S. Agency for InternationalDevelopment and the foundation to create 40 village banks inThailand.
Capitalization for one bank typically will cost a sponsoringagency $5,000.
Beryl Rupp, a Rotary Club official in Phoenix, says the bankmembers buy necessities with their profits or savings: a chair tosit on, pots to cook in, blankets, better food.
``They say things like, `Now I'm somebody,' or `My husbandrespects me more.'''
Their vehicle for improvement is the village bank, eachcomprised of 30 to 50 women who, through loans starting at $50, canearn enough to provide savings and create capital.
Hatch says theloans give them freedom to start their own investment projects inor near home.
The foundation will go into a village with a joint-venturepartner that puts up at least half of the capitalization, such asRotary Clubs or Catholic Relief Services, and identify a key woman.
``Forget the mayor, forget the priest, forget the chief,'' Hatchsays.
At the meeting, the women circle illustrated examples ofquick-turnover work they want the loans to finance.
It might beselling produce, groceries, baked goods, raising chickens, sewingor craftwork.
Each woman signs her name or provides a thumbprint ascollateral, agreeing to repay one-sixteenth of the loan weekly,plus interest of 1 percent to 3 percent, in line with local banks.
In some countries, the repayment rate has been 100 percent.
``Fifty percent or more are illiterate, and I would say 90percent of them don't have any idea of what they're getting intowhen we start out,'' says Hatch.
``And yet within 16 weeks they'reall experts.
But at the same time, each woman has been depositing weekly savingsof at least 20 percent of the original loan.
Interest in village banking is mounting.
The United Nations has provided a $50,000 grant to research theeffects of women's empowerment through village banking on maternaland child health practices.
Rotary Club 100, a Phoenix organization, and a Rotary Club ofMexico City are in a joint venture, having funded five villagebanks in Guaymas, Mexico, with another four to be launched in theslums of Mexico City.
