Introduction: Though the forms for the 1990 census are already at the printers, Congress is contemplating adding a question: Are you an illegal immigrant?
The Census Bureau, as it has in the past, is planning to count all residents of the nation regardless of legal status.
But the Senate already has voted to force the Census Bureau to exclude illegal immigrants in preparing tallies for congressional reapportionment.
"It is wrong to apportion congressional seats by counting people who would be deported if our immigration laws were enforced," Rep. Thomas Petri (R., Wis.) said in a recent House debate.
Counting illegal immigrants in 1990 is likely to mean one less seat in the House for Pennsylvania and one more for California, according to the private Population Reference Bureau.
Illegal aliens are actually taking representation away from Americans," says David Ray, spokesman for the Federation for American Immigration Reform.
That meant one extra seat in the House for California and New York and one less seat for Indiana and Georgia.
Organizations that represent Hispanics are particularly worried about the congressional campaign.
As it is, the Census Bureau has a tremendous challenge in trying to convince everybody that the census is confidential," Mr. Vargas says.
"If the Census Bureau attempts to ask people their immigration status, that's going to be even harder."
"We tell people: Put your name down on the census form.
The bureau already plans to ask one in six respondents if they are citizens.
To satisfy congressional critics, it would have to ask everyone that question, and then ask the legal status of anyone who isn't a citizen.
Rep. Ridge dismisses the practical problems.
"We're spending billions on the census, and the only thing we get is a bunch of belly-aching about how difficult it will be," he complains.
not to gather demographic information."
The Senate, by a vote of 58-41, added a provision to a pending immigration bill to require the government to subtract illegal immigrants when it comes up with figures used for reapportionment.
Because California, Texas and other populous states that benefit from counting the illegal immigrants have such large delegations in the House, the House has always presented a bigger obstacle to the opponents of counting such immigrants.
The House did open the door to an amendment to a spending bill that would have barred census takers from "knowingly" counting any illegal immigrants, but the provision was quickly sidetracked on procedural grounds.
The Constitution originally called for counting "free persons" and indentured servants, and for counting slaves as three-fifths of a person.
Only "Indians not taxed" were excluded, but no one has fallen into that category since 1940.
They wrote, for instance, that only those who have been "seven years a citizen of the United States" can serve in the House.
The word "person" was repeated in the 14th Amendment, which was drafted after the Civil War.
Those in Congress and at the Census Bureau who favor continuing the practice of counting all residents of the U.S. conclude that this language unambiguously resolves the debate.
