Introduction:   Thousands of peoleprayed, cheered, danced, beat drums and observed other traditionstoday as a total eclipse of the sun darkened a wide area ofIndonesia and the southern Philippines.
A partial eclipse was visible across a wide area of Asia as farwest as India _ including Southeast Asia, China, Japan and NewGuinea as well as parts of Australia and the Pacific islands.
Scientists said the eclipse would end at sunset in the Gulf ofAlaska.
Clouds obscured the solar spectacular in Jakarta, Indonesia,Hong Kong and in the eastern Mindanao city of Davao, wherethousands of tourists and scientists had gathered to observe theeclipse.
But it was visible for about 3 minutes in this city about 650miles southeast of Manila despite early scattered clouds.
PresidentCorazon Aquino flew in to witness the event.
In Kurukshetra, India, an estimated 1 million pilgrims dippedinto the waters of the sacred Sannihit and Brahmsarover tanks aftera public address system announced the start of the eclipse.
Hymnswere chanted and conch shells blown during the ceremony about 90miles north of New Delhi.
Clouds blocked the first moments of the eclipse in GeneralSantos City.
But the cloud cover broke, setting off wild cheeringamong the thousands who watched the phenomenon in a scorchingtropical heat.
In Baguio City, 130 miles north of Manila, pregnant women of thelocal Ilocano community rinsed their hair during the eclipse withwater dripped from burned rice straws in a traditional ritual.
According to local superstition, babies conceived during orshortly before an eclipse will be deformed unless their motherspractice the ritual.
Many other Filipinos marked the eclipse by going to church.
``This phenomenon is a clear reminder from God for mankind torepent its sins,'' said Theresa Teopengco, a government employee.
Church bells in Davao tolled while police and civilians set offfirecrackers and fired weapons in the air to mark the eclipse.
In Manila, thousands turned out under clear skies to see thepartial eclipse that blocked about 75 percent of the sun's surfaceat its height.
