Introduction:As they scanned the flow of passengers at Los Angeles International Airport, police detective Clayton Searle and his fellow narcotics officer searched for the likely companion of the suspected drug courier who stood handcuffed nearby.
Only later did Searle and his partner from the Drug Enforcement Administration realize that the suspected drug courier they had arrested on that March day in 1988 was Joe Morgan, the former Cincinnati Reds second baseman who was inducted Monday into Major League baseball's Hall of Fame.
The 46-year-old Morgan, who is now an Oakland businessman and baseball broadcaster, is suing Searle and the city of Los Angeles in federal court, claiming that he was unfairly targeted because he is black and fit a certain "profile" that narcotics officers think a drug courier should look like.
"There's no doubt in our mind that the only reason they stopped Joe Morgan was because he is black and he was the first black who happened to come by," said William Barnes, one of the attorneys representing the former ballplayer.
The Morgan case also reflects a growing criticism of police use of the drug courier profile to stem the flow of drugs through airports.
"It's purely based on race or dress, not on whether you are involved in any drug activity," said Gary Trichter, a Houston defense lawyer and former police officer who specializes in such cases.
But the court said brief detentions must be based on a person's behavior, not just on race or appearance.
"Profiles are important and we use them, but exactly how we use them or what the profile is I cannot tell you," said Los Angeles Police Department Cmdr.
It's based on trying to protect the public."
He said that last year, 254 narcotics arrests were made at Los Angeles International Airport.
Neither Booth nor Schults would comment on the Morgan lawsuit, which is scheduled to go to trial for a second time next month in Los Angeles.
Both Searle, a 20-year Police Department veteran, and William Woessner, a DEA agent who was subsequently dropped from the lawsuit, have denied that they did anything wrong.
"I wish that this hadn't happened," Searle said.
"I wish (Morgan) luck now that I know who he is.
I just hope I never see him again."
Morgan could not be reached for comment.
But in court documents, he said that on March 15, 1988, he was waiting at Los Angeles International Airport for a connecting flight to Tucson to attend a golf tournament and was innocently making a phone call when Searle suddenly grabbed his shoulder and spun him around.
Asked to identify himself, Morgan said he told the officer that his wallet was in an attache case about 40 feet away but that Searle refused to let him retrieve it.
Minutes later, Morgan said, Searle grabbed him by the neck and they fell to the floor.
Morgan said the officer then put a knee in his back, wrenched his arms behind him and handcuffed him.
Instead, Morgan filed his complaint, in part, to discourage similar incidents from occurring, his attorneys said.
"If it wasn't Joe, this could have happened to me or my father or to any other black person."
Assistant City Atty.
Honey A. Lewis, who represents the officer and the Police Department, said Searle had acted properly and was merely asking Morgan to identify himself when Morgan suddenly became belligerent, spewing profanities and slapping the officer.
"If he had cooperated, none of this would have happened.
I think he had a bruised ego, and he was offended because the officer hadn't recognized him."
They said he was using an alias.
Since the passenger was black and indicated that his companion "looked like me," the officer began looking for a black man who was nervous-looking or having "other characteristics of a narcotics courier. "
When they spotted Morgan, Searle said, he tried to speak to him but Morgan started screaming profanities and "making animal noises" and hit him in the chest with a wild swing.
