Introduction:   People caught by Hurricane Hugo lastyear might disagree, but forecasters here say the deadly storm mayhave had a positive side effect _ it got the public's attention.
Hugo, which caused an unprecedented $10 billion in damage,killed 28 people in the Lesser Antilles islands and an additional29 in South Carolina.
But it would have been much more deadly if it had hit almostanywhere else, says Bob Sheets, director of the National HurricaneCenter.
At the advent of the Atlantic hurricane season, which runs fromJune 1 to Nov. 30, Sheets and other hurricane experts are usingHugo's example to get the attention of complacent coastal residentswho've never experienced such fury.
``Theconsequences of not being prepared are too great.''
Early warnings about Hugo last September allowed 350,000 peopleto evacuate safely, and in South Carolina the worst of thehurricane struck the Francis Marion National Forest betweenCharleston and Myrtle Beach, Sheets said.
It heavily damaged the fishing village of McClellanville andseveral small rural communities, but the population there is sparse.
According to one of the nation's leading hurricane experts, Hugomay have been the first in a new era of killer storms.
Hehad figured the 1989 season would be relatively mild, with onlyfour hurricanes; instead, seven hurricanes and four tropical stormskilled a total of 84 people.
Gray realized the 30-year drought in Africa's Sahel regioncorresponds almost exactly to the years when no major hurricaneshave struck the southeastern coast.
``Whether one causes the other is uncertain.
They both mayreflect larger-scale events.
But the Sahel is now getting up tonear-normal rainfall,'' Sheets said.
Gray plans to release his predictions for 1990 on June 5.
Last week, a preseason tropical depression brought heavyrain to Cuba.
A tropical depression becomes a tropical storm and is given aname if its sustained winds reach 39 mph; it becomes a hurricane ifwinds reach 74 mph.
The names for Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms this yearare: Arthur, Bertha, Cesar, Diana, Edouard, Fran, Gustav, Hortense,Isidore, Josephine, Klaus, Lili, Marco, Nana, Omar, Paloma, Rene,Sally, Teddy, Vicky and Wilfred.
