Introduction: A Long Beach-bound Exxon oil tanker ran aground on a reef Friday and spilled an estimated 8.4 million gallons of crude oil into Alaska's Prince William Sound, a pristine Pacific waterway heavily used by kayakers, fishermen and tourists.
The Exxon Valdez, a 987-foot tanker owned by Exxon Shipping Co., rammed the reef about 25 miles from the city of Valdez, the northernmost ice-free port in the United States, at 12:30 a.m. Coast Guard officers speculated that the ship's captain may have been trying to avoid icebergs from the nearby Columbia Glacier when the accident occurred.
Fish and Wildlife Service said the tanker had been spilling oil at a rate of 10,000 barrels an hour but the Coast Guard said the leak had become a mere trickle by 2:30 p.m., Alaska time.
U.S. Coast Guard Petty Officer John Gonzales said in a telephone interview from Valdez that the spill was staying "in the mid-channel" and did not seem to be moving toward the shore.
"We've had no report of any wildlife hurt at this time," he said.
Environmentalists also expressed concern about whales, sea lions and other wildlife.
Twenty people were aboard the ship but there were no immediate reports of injuries, said Dave Parish, a spokesman for Exxon USA, in a telephone interview from Anchorage.
Another Exxon tanker was attempting to pump the oil out of the crippled vessel, and two Coast Guard investigators were on board the Valdez, he said.
Fish and Wildlife Service in Anchorage, said the reef ripped a 150-foot gash in the vessel, which was carrying 1.2 million barrels of oil, and there was fear that the tanker could break apart further.
"If it breaks up on the rocks, then anything could happen," he said in a telephone interview.
The seas were calm Friday and the forecast was for continued calm until Sunday.
They are moving way too slowly," said University of Alaska professor Richard Steiner, who flew over the slick Friday.
"There (was) no oil (cleanup equipment) out there and it's been 14 hours since it happened.
"It looks devastating.
We saw six sea lions inside the slick, swimming, trying to avoid it, and they had no idea which way to go."
Cindy Lowry, Alaska regional director for Greenpeace, also complained about the pace of the cleanup.
Exxon's Parish said everything possible was being done.
The immediate response to the spill was handled by crews from the terminal at Valdez.
Floating Oil Booms Gonzales, the Coast Guard spokesman, said the terminal has cleanup equipment on site for minor spills.
"It's also a pretty well-established tourist attraction, with sailing and glacier viewing trips.
The spill is expected to add fuel to a campaign by environmentalists to prevent further oil development in Alaska, particularly in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
"This is a consequence of North Slope oil development that is rarely mentioned."
Expected Worst " But this could be a catastrophic occurrence, so we're concerned," he said.
He said that state officials were considering the use of chemicals to disperse and sink the oil. "
"It's going to be a tough judgment call."
Cowper said that conventional responses, such as booms, probably would not work because the spill is so large. "
You probably couldn't do it (contain the spill) with all the equipment available in North America.
This is a major spill by any reckoning.
"We've been able to brag for a long time that there's never been a major oil spill in Valdez Harbor.
Now, we can't do that anymore."
