Introduction: THE 74-year-old man said it was "like needles or nails being stuck in" whenpolice handcuffed him behind his back as he lay face down.
Then the policelifted him by his arms and dragged him from the scene.
Hundreds have charged that policein more than 50 cities have used excessive force in removing demonstratorsintent on closing down abortion facilities.
Operation Rescue, which draws participantslargely from conservative Catholic and Protestant circles, is a nationalmovement that organizes demonstrations at abortion facilities.
The persistent complaints and numeroussuits against police by Operation Rescue have taken on a new significance inrecent months in the wake of the Los Angeles police beating of motorist RodneyKing.
But government agencies, the press and civillibertarians have reacted quite differently to Operation Rescue videos showingapparent police brutality and to reports of police abuse of hundreds of theactivists across the country.
Other scenes showpolice apparently placing fingers into the nostrils of one demonstrator andgrabbing the breast of a female protester to force compliance.
Thesettlement over police use of nunchakus in Los Angeles, like the videos andphotographs showing police using pain compliance techniques on Rescueparticipants, received little attention from the public, civil rights groupsor the press.
Even Gandhi and Martin Luther KingJr.
Philip Wogaman, professor of Christian social ethics atWesley Theological Seminary in Washington, D.C.believes the comparison withother kinds of protests breaks down at several points.
As early as 1989, soon after Operation Rescue beganwidespread sit-ins to disrupt abortion facilities, William B. Allen, thenchairman of the U.S. Civil Rights Commission, sounded an alarm.
"I amconcerned that anti-abortion protesters are receiving selective prosecutionand selectively harsh treatment, unlike that received by other demonstratorsfor other causes," said Allen, who generally opposes abortion.
ColleenO'Connor, the American Civil Liberties Union's national public educationdirector, and Carol Sobel, the ACLU's senior staff counsel in Los Angeles,said they agree that police have abused Operation Rescue participants.
The ACLU may support some of Operation Rescue's claims of police brutality,but Sobel said it also has won a $110,000 judgment in a case in which the ACLUhad obtained an injunction against the anti-abortion group.
The CivilRights Commission in 1989, under pressure from some members of Congress,decided against an investigation of alleged police brutality againstanti-abortion activists and decided not to ask the Justice Department toinvestigate.
A commission spokeswoman said its legal mandate prohibitsdealing with abortion issues.
Critics of the commission's decision not toinvestigate say the issue was, and is, police brutality, not abortion.
