The Coast Guard said the slickand patches of oil separated from it were spread over an area ofabout 100 square miles.
Exxon Shipping spokesman Brian Dunphy told The Associated Pressthat the captain of the tanker Exxon Valdez, Joseph Hazelwood, wasnot on the bridge at the time of the accident and that third mateGregory Cousins was in command.
``It's Exxon's policy that in the waters that the ship waslocated in, the captain should have been on the bridge,'' Dunphysaid.
``There's a problem there in that he was not there.
``He didn't have a proper pilot's license for that.
He wasn'tauthorized by the company, nor was it legal,'' she said.
Dunphy said he did not know why Hazelwood was not on the bridge.
``I am unaware of any explanation he has made at this time.
There is a full investigation that will occur on the incident,''Dunphy said, adding that the captain is consulting with an attorney.
Ten supertankers remained anchored 33 miles from Valdez, unableto move toward shore because the harbor remains closed.
Department of Interior spokeswoman Pamela Bergmann said awildlife specialist sailed in the sound Saturday and observed 75ducks and two otters coated with oil.
They could not be capturedfor cleaning, she said.
Gov.
Steve Cowper declared Prince William Sound a disaster area,freeing state resources for cleanup and paving the way for afederal disaster declaration.
``This oil spill may well be the greatest disaster to hit Alaskasince the Good Friday earthquake 25 years ago,'' Cowper said in anews release.
The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez, carrying 1.2 million barrelsof North Slope crude oil loaded at Valdez, ran onto a reef 25 milesfrom the port early Friday after swinging out of a traffic lane toavoid ice.
Valdez is at the southern end of the 800-mile Alaska oilpipeline.
Theonly larger oil-related accident in U.S. waters was the spillingand burning of up to 10.7 million gallons of oil when two shipscollided in Galveston Bay in 1979.
More than four miles of floating boom had been placed in aneffort to contain the oil, the Coast Guard said Sunday.
Anadditional 3,000 feet was to be deployed at Galena Bay at therequest of fishermen.
Skimming boats worked to remove the oil.
The Coast Guard estimated the area affected by the spill at 100square miles.
However, Exxon insisted that the area was only 10 to12 square miles, and Coast Guard officials said they were at a lossto explain the difference in estimates.
The Coast Guard said about84,000 gallons of oil an hour was being transferred; at that rate,the unloading could take seven days.
By late Sunday, Exxon officials said a total of 37,500 barrelsof oil had been transferred in the first two days of the operation,leaving more than 900,000 barrels on the ship.
Tests were under way to determine if dispersal chemicals shouldbe used despite the potential for environmental damage.
The agentsneed wave action to help break up the thick crude oil.
Weather hadbeen calm since the accident, but the National Weather Service saidthe wind was expected to increase to 25 mph and stir up a 5- to6-foot chop on the sound.
An experiment to assess the possibility of burning off the oilwas completed early Sunday and the Coast Guard said Exxon officialswere ``cautiously optimistic.''
Environmentalists, the governor and other top state officialshave accused Exxon and Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. of respondingtoo slowly to the spill.
Both companies said they were satisfied with the handling of theproblem.
``We want to make sure we don't make any mistakes incleaning up the spill.''
Four are oiltanks; two are ballast tanks.
``It's possible they could avoid the oil,'' Brown said.
``Half of Cordova is operating on credit,'' Ott said.
