More than 150 metersand gauges track seismic activity, rock strain, crustal tilt, tidalmovements and ground water levels.
The data are telemetered to Tokyo where they are monitored around the clockin the hope that six experts, to be summoned at a moment's notice, willrecognise unusual phenomena that may indicate an imminent earthquake.
If thecommittee so advises, Japan's prime minister will issue an earthquakewarning for the Tokai area.
Trains will be stopped, traffic routed out of the area, stores closed andpupils let out of schools.
Areas prone to landslides and tidal waves will beevacuated.
Hospitals, firefighters and rescue crews will go on alert.
For prediction believers, it is a smallprice to pay, as Japan is one of the world's most earthquake-pronecountries.
But for increasingly vocal sceptics in Japan, it is at best a misguidedeffort that wastes money and is dangerously misleading the public.
Japan made earthquake prediction a national project in 1965 when scientiststhroughout the world were optimistic about prediction.
In Japan, prediction took on urgency when seismologists concluded that theTokai area was overdue for a significant quake.
The Philippine SeaPlate is diving beneath the Eurasian Plate.
The Tokai section last ruptured in 1854.
That prospect led to the1978 Large-Scale Earthquake Countermeasures Act, which established thewarning procedure and launched hazard mitigation and emergency responseprogrammes.
Even prediction supportersadmit there is no scientific theory on which to base a forecast.
Predictionhinges on spotting anomalous phenomena, or precursors.
Andmany earthquakes occur without any identifiable precursor, even inretrospect.
Recent studies by seismologists at the Ministryof Construction have indicated the possibility of a significant quakeoccurring in the Izu area between Tokai and Tokyo.
Kiyoo Mogi, chairman of the six-member panel that will make the call on theTokai earthquake and former head of the University of Tokyo's EarthquakeResearch Institute, says several factors make the Tokai region more suitedthan others for what he calls 'a national experiment'.The region's geology is straightforward, so they can narrow down the likelylocation of the anticipated earthquake.
The evidence is that significant strain has accumulatedalong the fault since the region's last big earthquake.
Hesays if they knew what precursory phenomena occurred the last time thatsection of the fault slipped, in 1854, they would be able to predict thenext earthquake.
This all makes a successfulprediction a long shot.
Japan's prediction research activities, primarily overseen by theMinistry of Education, Science and Culture, are subject to no such review.
The public, and even public officials, remain largely unaware that Japan'sscientists are debating whether prediction is impossible or merelydifficult.
Public officials, however, are insisting the experts make an 'it'scoming' or 'it's not' decision.
Meanwhile, the controversy might be settledif the experts get their call from the technicians monitoring the Tokaidata.
