Introduction: In his State of the Union address last January, President Reagan announced that welfare reform would be a priority of his administration in its final three years.
He instructed his charges to draw up plans for "immediate action" that would enable poor families to achieve "real and lasting emancipation" from welfare dependency. "
Americans have become increasingly exasperated by the enormous amount of money the federal government devotes each year to anti-poverty programs, with little apparent abatement in poverty.
The president correctly sensed that the public wants reform.
If the president lets up on welfare reform, he will disappoint those whose hopes he raised last January, a group that surely includes many of the poor who understand better than any politician how deficient the current system is.
The president ought to challenge Congress to respond to his initiatives.
His Domestic Policy Council has drafted a blueprint.
Many of the governors seem to like the plan, as they have already unveiled their own proposals for welfare reform.
This suggests that the Democrats aren't as serious about welfare reform as the governors and the American public are.
The Democrats have long been beholden to the welfare lobby, whose interests now have less to do with alleviating poverty than with enlarging the welfare bureaucracy.
This past December, a coalition of some 80 organizations, most with headquarters in Washington, issued a "statement of principles" calling for increased spending for poverty and jobs programs.
Congressional Democrats seem to be in agreement with the welfare lobby.
It will be difficult for Congress to sell restored or additional spending on current poverty programs when the American people are already spending more than $100 billion a year on these programs.
With the ball in its court, Congress can decide either to work with the president and the governors, or it can continue to place the interests of the welfare lobby ahead of the interests of the poor.
