Introduction: Ben Johnson spent his homecoming in seclusion,without the Olympic gold medal and the hero's welcome, as Canadiansbemoaned the fate of the sprinter who failed the drug test.
My family still loves me.''
Stripped of the gold and banned for life from Canadian teams,Johnson cried in the back of a limousine that whisked him to hismother's home in suburban Toronto after the grueling trip fromSeoul.
Chaos spoiled a gilt-edged moment for a man who had run 100meters in the fastest time ever, 9.79 seconds.
Johnson, surrounded by a phalanx of security guards, ducked intoa car and made a mad dash for the door when he arrived at thehouse.
On the way to New York, however, he stayed in the passengercabin, appearing calm throughout the flight, the Globe said.
Agroup of flight attendants swarmed around Johnson for a photo.
``First I was shocked, but after a while, I don't care,''Johnson said when asked what he felt after he was informed he hadfailed the drug test.
In Canada, a parade in his adopted hometown was canceled, andpromoters backed out of deals or announced their ties with thesprinter would expire quietly.
Johnson's family and close friends also denied he took steroids   `` I know my son doesn't take drugs.
Iknow it,'' said his father, Ben Johnson Sr., from Falmouth,Jamaica, in an interview with the Toronto Globe and Mail.
``Ben loved mom too much to discredit her in any way,'' said hissister, Claire Rodney, of suburban Toronto.
Johnson had dedicated his gold to his mother, Gloria, and theCanadian people.
He wantsto be with people who love him now, not the hypocrites whoabandoned him,'' Ms. Rodney said outside her mother's house.
``He looks great.
Being at home is the best medicine for him,''said Ms. Rodney.
``My brother is not a druggie.''
His personal physician, Dr. George Astaphan, also said nosteroids were dispensed.
In Montreal, Johnson's fans said they were disappointed.
``The last flicker of hope just died,'' said Danny Planetta, whowas watching TV at a bar when he heard Monday night that Johnsonhad tested positive for steroids.
``When he won, we won and we were raving about it ...
The guywas a hero and now he is just a big disappointment.
