Introduction: Authorities questioned the badly injured pilot of acrashed Boeing 737 Wednesday, but revealed no clues as to why thejet's undamaged right engine was shut down well before the crashwhile the other engine burned.
The Civil Aviation Authority, meanwhile, ordered increasedinspections on 37 airplanes with CFM56 engines, the type on theMidland Airways jet that crashed Sunday.
Investigators said muchmore work was needed to pinpoint the cause of the crash, whichkilled 44 people and injured 82.
The government also ordered immediate checks of engine monitoringsystems on similar aircraft to verify that they correctly indicateright and left, prompting speculation that a malfunctioning alarmsystem could have misled the flight crew.
Freddie Yetman, technical secretary of the British Airline PilotsAssociation, said this showed that investigators ``must have somesuspicion of these circuits.''
``FatalError'' said the Daily Star.
``Pilot Shut Off the Wrong Engine''said the Sun.
The statement from the department's Air Accidents InvestigationBranch also confirmed that the airplane's left engine caught fireand the right engine was shut down, and that pilot Kevin Hunt hadtold ground control the fire was in the right engine.
In the United States, NBC News quoted unidentified U.S.government sources as saying ``the plane's flight recorders, whichmonitor engine performance and the pilots' conversations, indicatethe crew shut down the wrong engine.
But the network said investigators had yet to detemine whetherfaulty instruments contributed to the crash.
Spokesmen for both the FAA and the National Transportation Boardsaid they knew of no information reaching U.S. officials about theflight recorders' contents.
The airplane's two ``black boxes,'' the cockpit voice recorderand digital flight data recorder, are being examined at thegovernment's laboratory in Farnborough, outside London.
The Seattle factory also made a check and flow valve for the F404engine aboard the Navy's FA-18 fighter, GE spokesman Richard Kennedysaid Wednesday.
Government sources,speaking on condition of anonymity, said Hunt reported at 8:06 p.m.that ``I have an engine on fire.''
Then, at 8:14 p.m., the sourcessaid he told traffic control: ``I am shutting down the starboard(right) engine.''
The plane crashed 12 minutes later at 8:26 p.m.
The engines are made jointly by U.S.-based GE and a Frenchcompany, SNECMA.
Boeing Commercial Airplanes spokesman Craig Martin said inSeattle of the FAA's inspection order, ``We certainly believe it's aprudent measure to go out and check to make sure there's nothingwrong with the fleet.
