Silvery sticks of driftwood poke through a deep blanket of snow,and smooth gray pebbles roll in the surf under the gaze of a baldeagle perched in a shoreside spruce.
But the view doesn't impress Joe Bridgman of the AlaskaDepartment of Environmental Conservation.
``Oil,'' he says.
The pungent odor of petroleum wafts through the air as the holeturns black with crude oil, an oozing remnant of the 10.8 milliongallons spilled into Prince William Sound last March 24 by thetanker Exxon Valdez.
Bridgman scoops up a shovelful of gravel, lugs it to the water'sedge and dumps it in.
``Hundreds of gallons of oil are locked up under this beach,''he says.
There are hundreds of beachesall over the sound that are still oiled, and the oil is slowlybleeding out.
Now, is that a threat or isn't it?''
Certainly, the worst isover; thousands of dead birds no longer wash up on shorelines asthey did last summer.
But assessing the continuing damage wrought by the nation's mostextensive _ and expensive _ oil spill has just begun.
Any hope of a quick solution faded last summer as oil from theExxon Valdez spread across 1,100 miles of Alaska's wild southerncoast.
A cleanup army of 12,000 workers polished rocks by hand, blastedbeaches with hot water and sprayed fertilizer to promote the growthof oil-eating microbes.
About 20 percent to 40percent is believed to have evaporated.
That leaves 50 percent to75 percent of the oil in the water, on the ocean bottom or onbeaches.
Some was soaked up by unwilling sponges: the seabirds, eaglesand sea otters whose carcasses now lie frozen in five vans in anAnchorage storage yard, awaiting their day as physical evidence incourt.
Workers found more than 1,000 dead otters, a sizable chunk ofthe spill area's total population of 15,000 to 22,000.
Many of Prince William Sound's 3,000 bald eagles also suffered;at least 151 died, most poisoned by scavenging the oily remains ofsome of the 34,400 dead seabirds recovered.
``We never claimed that the spill put any animal on theendangered species list, but that's missing the point,'' said Fishand Wildlife spokesman Bruce Batten.
``It's still the greatesthuman-caused wildlife disaster that this agency knows about.''
Oily carcasses were an obvious measure of the spill's impact,but victims also included less visible members of the ecosystem,such as young salmon and tiny intertidal creatures.
Capt.
Exxon officials, meanwhile, say their winter monitoring of 64sites shows wind and waves have scoured away, on average, more thanhalf the surface oil left in September, and up to 80 percent of theburied oil.
``From a layman's point of view, what's left out there is reallyinsignificant,'' said Exxon scientist Andy Teal.
