The ostensible purpose of the recent session with PeterHart was to discuss the public mood on campaign financereform.
Another described it as "combustible.
Averagecitizens, the pollsters found, believe they "simply are notbeing heard in Washington," and more and more are losingconfidence in the electoral system as a means of influencinggovernment.
Accordingly, these politicians may be in real trouble thisyear.
The 1990 election offered some early warning signs.
Normally, when Republicans have a good year, Democrats'average victory margin declines, and vice versa.
But in 1990,voters declared a plague on both parties' houses,underscoring what polls and other focus groups demonstrate:The disaffection with politicians isn't ideological.
This helps explain the strong momentum for limitinglawmakers' terms, a sentiment fueled by the recentdisclosures of the House banking and restaurant fiascos.
Termlimits would accomplish few of their proponents' goals --more-independentminded and less-beholden lawmakers -- andwould result in many unintended consequences-far more poweraccruing to unelected staff and special-interest lobbyists.
But that's of little concern to frustrated voters who arelashing out because nothing else seems to work.
But there's little consensus among eitherpoliticians or the voters themselves on these issues.
Soprogress will be slow.
Congress can make some symbolic moves, however.
It caneliminate its more indefensible perquisites, such as the freeprescription drugs.
Granted,incumbents have little incentive to work against their narrowself-interest.
The nexus of many of theproblems -- entrenched arrogance, more concern for powerfulinterests than average citizens and the obscene preoccupationwith campaign contributions -- is the committee system.
While both men are deeply dismayed at the current state ofCongress, they see term limits as a cure worse than theillness. "
Term limits really hit at democracy," says Prof.Fenno.
Argues Mr. Ferris: "Voters never should be preventedfrom electing a person who they think is the bestrepresentative of that community.
Mr. Ferrisbelieves this would "put a vitality in the system" while notresulting, unlike overall term limits, in "a bunch ofneophytes who'd be more dependent on staff and lobbyists."Mr.
There'd be one other incalculable benefit.
