Introduction: A lightning-sparked fire in Utah's Zion National Park spread outof control to 1,100 acres Tuesday, but rain helped firefightershold the line on a 2,000-acre forest fire in Montana and two othermajor fires in Wyoming.
Gusty winds spread a third Wyoming fire over 400 acres of theBridger-Teton National Forest and forced the evacuation of acampground and summer cabins on Freemont Lake, a half mile from theblaze.
A fire that scorched 1,130 acres in and around the HiawathaNational Forest in Michigan was linked to a vehicle exhaust pipe.
Hundreds of small grass and brush fires were reported over theJuly 4 weekend, some caused by fireworks, in various parts of thecountry.
Last nightit sounded like every fire alarm in the area was going off.''
In California, a fireworks-caused blaze that swept over 2,200acres near Yosemite National Park was declared contained at dawnTuesday.
``We have evidence confirming that it was a bottle rocket,''said Mary Hale, a spokeswoman for the California Department ofForestry.
By Monday, $384,000 had been spent to combat the fire, she said.
Authorities will try to recover that money, said Pat Kaunert of theU.S.
Kentucky's Division of Forestry reported 85 fires burned 1,267acres in the first four days of July, compared to an average of 18fires and 165 acres for the whole month, spokesman Richard Greensaid.
But Dwight Barnett, a spokesman for the Tennessee Division ofForestry, said there were 26 wildland fires on the Fourth of July,which burned just 113 acres.
``We were very relieved to get through the weekend in such goodshape,'' he said, citing partly the care taken by people playingwith fireworks.
No injuries or property damage was reported.
The fire has been burning since at least June 19 in the CusterNational Forest.
Phil Jaquith, Beartooth District ranger for theforest, said Forest Service policy is to allow wilderness fires toburn unless they threaten trails or structures or are about tospread outside the wilderness boundary.
The lightning-sparked fire has been burning foralmost two weeks.
Rain Monday night also calmed three fires in YellowstoneNational Park in the state's northwest corner.
The blaze apparently was sparked by fireworks over the holidayweekend, Kingwill said.
In California, about 190 firefighters battled a wildfire thatburned 350 acres of brush Tuesday across steep terrain in an areaof Los Padres National Forest untouched by fire in 64 years, saidEarl Clayton of the U.S. Forest Service.
