Dincote also obtained information according to which "Feliciano" presided over the meeting, during which it was decided to start a new phase of the "people's war" as well as plan an operation to rescue Abimael Guzman, dead or alive, at any cost.
The following is one of the citations chosen by the Shining Path Central Committee to uphold its decisions: "Always taking into account the glorious actions of the people's war, the people's war cannot end.
The leadership may be wiped out completely or partially, but those leaders who are not must and can continue carrying out plans, the struggle, the people's war.
We were taught that the revolution will not stop, will not become paralyzed. "
This was selected from the document entitled "To Conquer Power in the Midst of the People's War" that was drafted during the Second Shining Path Central Committee Plenum, when Guzman was still free.
The document even mentions what must be done with those who uphold peace and put down arms: "There are two reasons for surrendering: to surrender in view of local reaction and to surrender in view of international reaction.
Its purpose is to ruin the revolution.
Those who surrender, therefore, are no good, and must be wiped out through fire and bloodshed."
The first of the five points discussed during the meeting refers to "reasserting" the agreements reached during the Third Central Committee Plenum, which was held in March 1992 and headed by Abimael Guzman Reinoso.
This plenum was labeled "glorious, historic, and momentous" as it planned the terrible wave of violence unleashed by the Shining Path in July 1992.
The second point of the document of the Central Committee meeting presided over by "Feliciano" highlights the agreements of the Working Meeting of the Shining Path leadership held in August 1993, almost one year after Guzman was arrested, and during which the implementation of the agreements of the Third Plenum held in March 1992 was discussed.
To reassert the conclusions of the Third Central Committee Plenum (March 1992), "personally presided over by President Gonzalo, whose victorious appearance revealed its glorious, historic, and momentous nature; the second most important milestone after the congress (held in 1988)."
Based on the conclusions of the Third Plenum and the Working Meeting, the Central Committee, during the meeting in February presided over by "Feliciano," reasserted "the principle of revolutionary violence as a universal law expressed in the people's war."
In order to confront the Black Group or LOD, which are nothing but Shining Path militants who sign Abimael Guzman's letters and uphold his "great decision and definition" to negotiate with the government in order to end the war, the Central Committee demands that the militants "grow stronger on the Basis for Partisan Unity [Base de Unidad Partidaria, BUP]," which is the Shining Path basic principles adopted during the 1988 Congress, and "arrange for conquering power in the midst of the people's war."
The Central Committee Plenum that "Feliciano" presided over in order to break away from the Black Group orders the "unleashing of a massive reassertion movement based on the BUP throughout the party, the People's Liberation Army, and among the masses of the New Power."
Abimael Guzman's letters to President Alberto Fujimori, the telephone conversation between Guzman and Javier Esparza Marquez (Guzman's brother-in-law, who is in charge of Shining Path's organization abroad), and the communiques released by Shining Path prisoners "are a counterrevolutionary scheme concocted by Yankee imperialists and the genocidal and traitorous dictatorship with the sinister help of the Black Group," the Central Committee concluded at its February meeting.
The activities of the Black Group "go against the conclusions of the Marxist-Leninist-Maoist-Gonzalo's Thoughts First Congress (1988), the BUP, the leadership, the party, and the people's war, which means that its members have voluntarily strayed from the party."
This clearly means that the negotiators of the peace agreement no longer belong to the Shining Path because their actions openly violate the agreements, resolutions, and decisions reached at party meetings such as the Third Plenum and the Working Meeting.
Furthermore:   5. "
Actions that go against principles cannot be accepted" because "it is an international communist rule that the leadership (of the party and the war) cannot be exercised from prison," and because "monstrosities like the `peace accord'(...) clash with our principles."
The Central Committee meeting that "Feliciano" presided over clearly defined its position toward Abimael Guzman Reinoso, whose ideological contribution to the people's war, called "Gonzalo's Thoughts," was acknowledged.
Guzman and the leaders who support his decision to hold talks with the administration signed a communique that was released in March.
This communique "warned against" and "denounced" the reports of "Feliciano's" Central Committee, which decided to go on with the war.
Under the guise of defending the party, they are undermining it and its leadership so as to bring about its defeat, by using empty rhetoric to disguise their partisan, opportunistic, and personal interests and ambitions, and by taking a blind, biased, subjective, and superficial approach to concrete reality.
The communique emphasized the decision to put an end to the people's war: "The people's war is over.
We warn our members against militaristic and revisionist approaches, and urge them to keep their eyes open to unmask this or any other scheme."
Guzman's call upon the militants in action to "abide" by the decision to hold talks with the administration in order to stop the war, and to fight those who disagree with this decision, is persistent: "Once again we warn the militants to be on guard against any desperate action, adventure, or provocation from third parties, because the goal of all this is to scuttle the proposed peace agreement.
Meanwhile, the Central Committee has acknowledged "Gonzalo's Thoughts" as the ideological basis for the "people's war," Guzman Reinoso's "leadership" and his inability to lead the party and the war from prison, and has decided to reorganize the Shining Path machine to launch a new stage of the war without Guzman.
The report states that the Shining Path is expected "to carry out isolated actions at key targets in order to demonstrate its operational capacity."
Intelligence agents believe that the most likely targets are "financial companies, banks, stores, and industries, in order to sow confusion among local and foreign investors."
Government politicians and high-ranking members of the forces of order are also among the main targets.
In this case the objective is to obtain the freedom of Abimael Guzman Reinoso."
The counterterrorism police believe that the Shining Path "urgently needs to demonstrate its power in order to get out of its current defensive position. "
Shining Path members believe that surrender deserves capital punishment.
The Dincote report, which confirmed that "Feliciano" presided over a Shining Path Central Committee meeting somewhere in Razuillca, added that it has been decided to "rescue Abimael Guzman Reinoso, dead or alive."
The Shining Path also considered the possibility of winning over Peruvian security forces personnel "so as to attract new members, including Armed Forces Special Operations personnel. "
Feliciano" claims that the "forged letters" sent to President Alberto Fujimori, the communiques supporting the peace agreement signed by Shining Path prisoners in Canto Grande, Chorrillos, and Yanamayo, and the statements and gestures of Osman Morote Bariionuevo and Edmundo Cox Beuzeville are all part of this plot.
