``I think everyone agrees that the risks are low,'' says MartinRaff, a neurobiologist at University College, London.
``But theycertainly are not zero.
Mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE,was diagnosed only in 1986.
The incurable disease eats holes in the brains of its victims; inlate stages a sick animal may act skittish or stagger drunkenly.
The suspicion is that the disease was transmitted through cattlefeed, which used to contain sheep by-products as a proteinsupplement.
The government banned the use of sheep offal in cattle feed inJune 1988, and later banned the use of cattle brain, spleen,thymus, intestines and spinal cord in food for humans.
Earlier this month, the government announced it would payfarmers 100 percent of market value or average market price,whichever is less, for each animal diagnosed with BSE.
The disease struck one of his own cows, Gourlay said.
``In thecourse of 24 hours, the animal went from being ostensibly quitenormal to very vicious and totally disoriented.''
As of Feb. 9, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Foodsaid that 9,998 cattle have been destroyed after being diagnosedwith BSE.
The government has paid $6.1 million in compensation, and isbudgeting $16 million for 1990.
Ireland's Department of Agriculture and Food said about 20 caseshave been confirmed there, all of them near the border with theBritish province of Northern Ireland.
David Maclean, a junior agriculture minister, has complained of``BSE hysteria'' in the media and has insisted that the risk of thedisease passing to humans is ``remote.''
A commission chaired by Professor Sir Richard Southwood ofOxford University reported last year that the cause of BSE ``isquite unlike any bacteria or known viruses.''
The Southwood report said it was ``most unlikely'' that thedisease was a threat to humans.
About two dozen cases were reported inBritain last year.
The committee's report,released early this year, said it is only a ``shrewd guess'' thatBSE was transmitted through sheep offal in cattle feed.
