The expectation is that growth in US exports to Mexico and Canadawill outpace growth in imports from its neighbours to the north and south.
Investors are not alone in their optimistic view of Nafta.
There is, however, the dark side of Nafta to consider.
What if Congressvotes no?
Investors fear that a rejection of Nafta would have dangerousknock- on effects around the world, depressing share prices in the US, LatinAmerica and eventually Europe, and endangering vital trade negotiations overthe Uruguay Round.
If he arrives there fresh from defeat on Nafta, thePresident's authority on trade issues will be compromised.
Manyeconomists argue that the competitive forces unleashed by the acceleratingcollapse of international trade barriers have helped restrain globalinflation.
Low worldwide inflation has kept bond yields at historic lows,which in turn have boosted share prices to record highs in many markets.
Althoughthe President inherited the trade pact from his Republican predecessor, hehas invested a lot of his own political capital in getting Nafta throughCongress.
On paper, this should not be a particularly difficult task,because Congress is controlled by Democrats.
Yet, opposition to Nafta among Democratic legislators beholden to labourinterests is considerable.
Anti-Nafta forces have warned that opening uptrade with Mexico will lead to a migration of American jobs south of theborder, where wages are much lower.
Because the domestic labour marketremains weak, this line has struck a strong chord with ordinary Americans.
As of yesterday, the outcome of the vote was deemed too close to call.
Stockmarkets in Mexico and the US, however, believe the chances of success forNafta improved this week.
Whether this helped swing the votes of some anti-Nafta legislators theClinton administration's way remains to be seem.
Nafta is playing on investors' minds because doubts over its passage throughCongress have arisen at a vulnerable time for stock and bond prices.
Amid all the doubts over the Nafta, one thing is certain, trading on marketsnext week is likely to be hamstrung by uncertainty over Wednesday night'svote, which, like the battle over President Clinton's first budget, will beextremely close.
