Temperatures during the Old Style/Chicago marathon hovered in the mid-60s, with 53% humidity.
The heat sapped the strength of most runners, giving the patient and steady runners a distinct advantage.
It was the slowest winning time in this race since 1982.
Among the women, Lisa Weidenbach of Issaquah, Wash., repeated as champion, with a personal best of 2:28:15, impressive under the circumstances.
It was the second-hottest race in Chicago history, only 1978 was worse.
The race conditions were simply more bad luck for the 12th running of Chicago's marathon, which has been fighting for respectability since losing its sponsor in 1986 and staging no race in 1987.
After a week of summer-like weather, race organizers hoped to be salvaged by a good race; to have, if not impressive times on this flat and fast course, at least a memorable race.
The lead pack went through the half-marathon at 1:04:50, a pace that would wither in the second half.
No one who was in the lead pack at the halfway point, with the exception of Montero, finished in the top five.
"I was concentrating on running five-minute miles," he said.
He accomplished that, almost exactly.
Davies-Hale caught the second pack at 13 miles and met up with pre-race favorite Steve Binns, who lives 30 miles from Davies-Hale in England's West Midlands.
"I asked Binnsie who was in the first group, he told me, and I went," Davies-Hale said.
At 22 miles, Davies-Hale was in the lead and in control, running smoothly and not appearing to labor under the bright sun.
Following him, and likewise picking off the fading runners in the first pack, were Ravil Kashapov of the Soviet Union, who was second in 2:13:19, and David Long, also from the British Midlands, who was third in 2:13:37.
In the women's race, Weidenbach had not been the favorite and she agreed with that handicapping.
O'Brien, a 22-year-old from Boston, has been on the verge of a breakthrough for a long time.
She took off in Sunday's race with authority and ran with a 20-30-second cushion for 15 miles.
Then, the heat from the sun and the perceptible heat of Weidenbach constantly gaining did her in.
It was the same spot, the corner of Wells and North Avenue, that Weidenbach had taken the lead in last year's race.
Carla Beurskens of the Netherlands, at 37 still an amazing runner, eventually passed the struggling O'Brien and placed second 2:30:24.
O'Brien was third in 2:31:19.
Given the heat, the humidity and the wind, Weidenbach's time might have been as much as two minutes faster.
Even the 2:28 is respectable -- only five U.S. women have run under 2:30.
"I guess when you are having a good day, nothing is going to get you down," she said.
About as far as he seemed willing to go, on the celebrity scale, was to say he had pitched the plumbing job.
Davies-Hale may have shown a liking for running in heat when he won the Boulder Bolder that year in terrific heat.
He was a 1984 Olympian in the steeplechase and, on the advice of others, moved up to 5,000 and 10,000 meters.
Still, Davies-Hale is unsure what his future in the marathon is.
"I've already had a great track season," Davies-Hale said.
Men's and women's winners won $50,000, second place won $30,000 and third place $20,000.
