Officials said 566 Gila trout were fished out of Diamond Creek insouthwestern New Mexico, put in containers on mules and horses,loaded onto trucks and brought to the Mescalero Fish Hatchery.
Much of the creek was contaminated by ash from thelightning-caused Divide fire, which started June 30 and burned about10,000 acres 150 miles southwest of Albuquerque, said Forest Servicespokeswoman Andrea Garcia.
Martinez said rescuers used electric shockers to stun the fish,then netted them.
When a fish is stunned, it comes to the surface.
Thetrout was placed on the federal endangered species list in 1967.
Lightning sparked three small fires Thursday and today, butfirefighters were extinguishing them today, said Willie Zapata, U.S.Forest Service dispatcher in Gila.
They hoped to have the 6-day-old fire contained by late today,but authorities were concerned that higher temperatures could hampertheir efforts.
Firefighters on Thursday said they had contained the 2,000-acreLivermore Fire west of Fort Collins, Colo., in Roosevelt NationalForest, the last of three major fires in Colorado to be encircled byfirefighters.
In northwest Nebraska, members of a volunteer fire department anda few National Guardsmen stood by the smoldering remains of a blazethat charred 48,000 acres of the Pine Ridge.
The fire, which ragedfor four days and destroyed 14 unoccupied structures, was containedWednesday and officials predicted it would be controlled soon.
The blazeblackened acres of ponderosa pine trees, many of them 60 to 80 yearsold, said U.S. Forest Service Fire Staff Officer Jim Carson.
Carson hoped for rain.
``My experience is that we'd see green grass again if we getenough moisture, say a half-inch of rain,'' he said.
Rains helped firefighters in western Wyoming forests.
The stormsdampened a fire in Bridger-Teton National Forest that had burnednearly 3,500 acres.
``It's been real quiet,'' said Dick Heninger, a ranger in theforest's Pinedale office.
Heninger said four crews will probably be released from the firetoday, leaving two to continue mop-up work.
