The next day, thejanitor is sick with the same flu the CEO had.
What's the link?
A poor ventilation system that does little more thanrecycle old, stale air from one end of the building to another.
The evidence comes from variousstudies of tuberculosis, measles and flu that spread in a manner that can onlybe explained by poor air ventilation.
"Modern office buildings are tight,"says Jon Rosenberg, public health officer in California's occupational healthprogram. "
Lack of windows is not necessarily the culprit. "
If ithas a good ventilation system .
you don't necessarily have to have a sickbuilding," Rosenberg says.
But, alas, many modern ventilation systemsrecirculate indoor air with little or no fresh air.
So the infectious bugsthat a worker exhales at one end of the building can end up, via theventilation system, being inhaled at the other end.
People are the source," says Dr. Edward Nardell, who studiesairborne infections for the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
The study found that 40 percent of the building'sworkers -- or 27 of 47 -- were infected with tuberculosis from one 30-year-oldsick employee.
"By recirculating the air,you spread it throughout the building," says Nardell.
"If tuberculosis can spread in poorly ventilated buildings, socan other infectious bugs.
Respiratory infection experts say that flu virusesand measles are easier to spread than TB.
The building's ventilationsystem permitted circulation of some outdoor air -- 15 cubic feet per minute-- a low level commonly found in buildings since the 1930s.
In the study, Nardell estimated that if outdoor airventilation in the government building had been doubled -- to about 35 cubicfeet per minute, a level that Massachusetts recommends for buildings wheresmoking is permitted -- only half as many workers would have been infectedwith tuberculosis.
(check) Tuberculosis can spread in homelessshelters, prisons and hospitals where ventilation is poor.
"In those tight buildings, they continue to recirculate it, and theyprobably build up.
"There's only so much you can do," Nardell says.
