Introduction: The City Council today asked countyprosecutors to investigate the conduct of a white policeman who wassecretly filmed while he pushed an off-duty black policeman througha plate-glass window.
``We're certainly not happy to have an incident like thisoccurring, but we need all the information,'' said Councilman ThomasJ.
Curt Livesay, an assisant Los Angeles County district attorneyand head of the office's Special Investigations Division, will leadthe probe, said district attorney spokesman Andy Reynolds.
Don Jackson, said he set upthe self-styled ``sting'' in Long Beach to expose alleged policeracism in the Los Angeles area.
The incident was broadcast on NBC's nationalnews Monday night.
Now, it is brought to your living roomin living color,'' said Frank Berry, president of the Long Beachchapter of the National Association for the Advancement of ColoredPeople.
``We will pursue it aggressively,'' said Long Beach City ManagerJames Hanklad.
Jackson and a companion were driving through a high-crime area ofthe city when their car was pulled over and Jackson got out.
But Jackson's boss said the black officer was looking for trouble.
``As a police chief,'' he added, ``I do not for one minutecondone the unlawful use of force or police brutality.''
The 30-year-old Jackson, who has been on a stress-relateddisability leave from his Hawthorne job for 22 months, contends theincident is typical of a pattern of racism by white officers in theLos Angeles area.
He has a disability lawsuit pending, has filedracism complaints against the department and conducted a similarpersonal sting operation against Los Angeles police.
Jackson was riding as a passenger with Jeffrey Hill, a30-year-old off-duty state corrections officer, when they werepulled over allegedly for straddling lanes, which they denied.
Jackson got out after the car stopped and police approached.
During an argument, Long Beach Officer Mark Dickey orderedJackson to face a building and put his hands behind his head.
OK, no problem,'' saidJackson on the videotape.
Police booked Jackson for investigation of interfering withpolice and challenging a police officer.
``The officer simply used violence,'' Jackson said Monday.
``I already cooperated and told him he could search me,'' Jacksonsaid.
``I had already had my hands up and was turned to the windowand he slammed my face in it.''
Jackson received support at a Monday night ceremony in LosAngeles commemorating King's birthday.
Jackson said he chose Long Beach police because of complaints tothe Police Misconduct Lawyer's Referral Service of Los Angeles.
Of those,27 were filed by minorities, and 24 of those involved confrontationswith white officers.
