Introduction:As Congress goes back into session today, the gulf betweenlegislators and the American people has never been greater.
Arecent Gallup survey found that 70% of House Members opposethe idea of limiting the number of congressional terms, whilethe public backed the idea two to one.
The rest of the country is frustrated with alegislature where the turnover is about that of thenon-elected British House of Lords.
Women aremore in favor of the idea than men.
"The message is clear.
The root of the problems with Congress is that, barringmajor scandal, it is almost impossible to defeat anincumbent.
One out of four House districtsthis year likely will have an incumbent running with nomajor-party opposition -- up from one out of five in 1988.One-candidate races are now spreading to the Senate.
Democratic Arkansas Senator David Pryor had spiritedcompetition in 1984 when he won with 57%; this year he has noopponent at all.
Senators have become just as brazen as their Housebrethren in shutting out competition.
Critics of term-limits say that -- franked mail or not --it's wrong to blame Congress for the now nearly 100%re-election rates since it is just as easy to vote against anincumbent as for.
Michael Kinsley writes in the New Republicthat if incumbents always win, it's because voters can't bebothered.
That takes money, andskewed campaign finance laws combined with taxpayer-paid junkmail effectively mean that only incumbents have the cash tomake themselves known and to be taken seriously by the media.
Incumbents ended the 1988 elections with $63 million leftover, while challengers were able to raise and spend a totalof only $39 million.
The polls indicate voters by two to one think the only waythey can control Congress effectively is by limiting terms.
That's why the Washington, D.C.-basedAmericans to Limit Congressional Terms is asking states tocall for a constitutional amendment to limit terms.
Italready has won in Utah and South Dakota.
Inthe current House it is 8%.Term limitation, once the accepted American tradition, hasbeen replaced by congressional careerism.
The opinion pollsfor term limitation show that the voters don't like thechange.
They now think the voluntary service limitation ofthe past must be made mandatory.
