Introduction:The Northwest Airlines jet that crashed Sunday in Detroit, killing at least 154 people, was involved in two incidents of engine failure in the past two years.
According to Federal Aviation Administration records, the McDonnell Douglas Corp. MD-82 jet made emergency landings in 1985 and 1986 following the loss of power in one of its two engines.
A Northwest spokesman confirmed that the incidents happened, but said they weren't related to Sunday's crash of Flight 255.
Though federal investigators were looking into a number of possible causes for the crash, which occurred shortly after takeoff, engine failure appeared to be a likely culprit.
According to Associated Press reports, some witnesses to the crash, including an air traffic controller, said they saw blue flame coming from one of the jetliner's engines just before it hit the ground and exploded into a fireball.
Following a summer of near-misses, delays and other snafus, some airline specialists said the accident could serve as a catalyst for a reassessment of the nation's air-travel system.
Even so, some congressional aides believe there will be a "spillover" effect, and that all aviation safety issues will now get closer scrutiny.
Moreover, although service problems have been the focus of much of the attention in recent months, the debate may now center more strongly on safety issues.
"There is going to be a lot of noise from Capitol Hill," said John Galipault, president of the Aviation Safety Institute.
The MD-82 jet, which has a good safety record, is designed to be able to take off and land even if one engine fails.
Safety officials wouldn't speculate on whether the plane's heavy load may have contributed to the crash.
The extras included six crew members, two babies who were being held by passengers and two Northwest employees riding on two of the plane's jump seats.
Wire-service reports said two persons on the ground also were killed, and that a 4-year-old girl was hospitalized in critical condition.
The JT8D-219 engines used on the jet have been the subject of some concern among federal safety officals.
In April, the National Transportation Safety Board urged the FAA to conduct a safety investigation of the 200 series of JT8D engines after some dangerous in-flight engine failures.
The board made the recommendation after a March 23 incident in which an American Airlines MD-82 plane approaching the Minneapolis airport experienced an engine surge and loss of power.
The FAA, in a May 29 response, told the board it essentially agreed with its recommendations and would take steps to require inspections of the engine and replacement of parts where necessary.
In its April report, the National Transportation Safety Board warned that "many" of the 330 MD-80 series airplanes operated by 12 U.S. and 14 foreign airlines world-wide "are potential candidates" for engine failure.
However, engineering changes have been made in some engines.
Thomas Haueter, of the safety recommendations staff of the safety agency, said that the board hadn't put out an emergency recommendation for immediate replacement of the pins because it was unclear if the problems that had occurred were merely isolated incidents or reflected system problems.
FAA officials at the crash scene wouldn't speculate on the reasons for the crash or comment on the plane's engines.
John Lauber, one of five members of the National Transportation Safety Board, said at a news conference at a hotel near the airport last night that there was no evidence at this point that either engine exploded or caught fire during flight.
He stressed that it was too early to draw any firm conclusions.
Among other things, the accident has focused attention on its recent service problems as well as discord among its workers.
Such concerns arose following reports of a work slowdown by Northwest mechanics.
There were reports yesterday that relatives of crash victims being flown in from Phoenix were asked to switch from one Northwest jet to another because of mechanical problems.
The MD-82 that crashed was a former Republic jet that Northwest acquired as part of the merger.
In the Minneapolis incident, the plane landed missing part of its tail cone.
A Northwest spokesman said the engines involved in those two incidents had since been replaced by other JT8D-200 series engines.
The controllers reported that shortly after the jetliner lifted off, it pitched from left to right, according to FAA spokesman John Leyden.
FAA records show that besides those incidents that involved the plane that crashed, problems with the turbine sections of JT8D-200 series engines occurred on three Republic flights in the past four years.
In another incident, at the Detroit airport in October 1985, an engine on an MD-82 "popped and began to unspool" on takeoff.
Congress is expected to act on a half-dozen major aviation bills this fall.
"Aviation is going to be a hot topic," said an aide to Sen. Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.).
Sunday's crash was the first time in 24 years that passengers were killed in an accident involving a Northwest plane.
In March, a commuter plane affiliated with Northwest crashed in Detroit, killing nine people.
The worst airline accident ever in the U.S. was the 1979 crash of an American Airlines jet in Chicago.
