Introduction: Rescuers crawled through collapsed homesand shops today looking for more victims of a tornado that carved a3-mile stretch of destruction, killing 17 people, injuring 463 andleaving 1,000 homeless.
``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in ablender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker BobCaraway, whose specialty is cave rescues.
He was among those calledout to help dig through rubble for survivors or the bodies of thedead.
The other tornadoes caused at least 19 injuries andfar-flung property damage.
In Huntsville, teams with cranes and floodlights searched forthe injured or dead, hampered by wind-whipped rain and temperaturesthat plummeted overnight from 73 degrees into the 30s.
Gov.
Guy Hunt sent 50 National Guardsmen to help and said hewould view damage Friday.
In Pennsylvania, the weather service said it receivedunconfirmed reports of a tornado that turned over a car and knockeddown trees and power lines near Gettysburg.
Elsewhere:   _ In Georgia, 19 people were injured, four critically, and atleast 200 people were evacuated after a tornado strus.
In a matter of seconds, cars were hurledthrough the air and crushed, and apartments and stores looked as ifthey had been bombed.
``It was like one big pop and that's wheneverything went.''
The National Weather Service had issued a tornado watch earlierin the day, but did not issue a more urgent tornado warning until4:39 p.m. CST, when the tornado was spotted at the municipal golfcourse.
By then, it was already tearing up the city.
Huntsville Police Maj. Robert Moder said this morning that 463people were injured by the twister, which plowed through a schooland rural areas as well as a shopping mall and adjacent apartments.
Police Chief Richard Ottman initially put the number of dead at19, but his clerk, Kitty Whitworth, later said the death toll waslowered to 17 after police confirmed the count of bodies.
No children in the school were killed, but about 30 youngsterswere in a kindergarten class at the building, and five werereported injured.
A worker at a building owned by the Madison County Jaycees said42 people were staying there early today, and described the mood ofthe survivors as ``shock, mostly, and disbelief.''
Theroadway was strewn with used bandages and medical gloves left byemergency workers treating the injured.
Humana Hospital administrator David Miller said doctors haddifficulty reaching the hospital because of blocked roads.
Those in the tornado's path spoke with awe of its fury.
``It came in with a huge roar, an enormous amount of water, andit just started shaking and tearing at everything it could get holdof,'' said real estate broker Ike Carroll, who was in his car.
``All of these heavyarcing, flashing lines that were just popping and snapping over thetop of us.
It was as if you were looking into an arc-welder,they were so bright.''
Kenneth Lenhard had undergone an operation at the CrestwoodHospital on Wednesday and returned to his room about an hour beforea window in the next room blew out as the tornado passed.
``There wasn't anything I could do, so I covered my head,''Lenhard said.
Kindergarteners were the only pupils left at the school by thetime the twister hit.
The city is home to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and theArmy's Redstone Arsenal, but no serious damage was reported fromthe space agency or weapons testing center.
At least two other tornadoes were reported in Alabama, injuringat least three people in addition to the Huntsville total.
``It didn't sound like a train like everybody says itdoes.
I lived near a train track.
It did not sound like a train.
``I saw one 18-wheeler flip over.
