Introduction: The epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy or 'mad cow' disease -which has killed more than 100,000 animals in the UK - is causing a new waveof public concern.
New cases are still running at almost 1,000 a week andlast month a second dairy farmer died of Creutzfeld-Jacob Disease, a braindisorder similar to BSE.Richard Lacey, a microbiology professor at Leeds University and the leadingcritic of government policy on BSE, said the deaths this year of two farmerswhose herds had suffered from mad cow disease could not be put down tochance.
He believes that BSE can trigger human brain disease.
I find it unbelievablethat the government and their hand-picked advisers can go on telling thepublic there is no danger.
Robert Will of Edinburgh's Western General Hospital,who has been monitoring CJD in the UK since 1990 on behalf of the healthdepartment, calculated that there was only a five per cent probability ofeven a single case occurring by chance among dairy farmers with BSE-affectedherds.
'It is most unlikely therefore that there is any direct link between thecases of BSE and the occurrence of disease in the patient.
The handful of patients known to have developed CJD through infection (fromcontaminated human growth hormone) showed a different pattern of symptoms.
But the report says that this is notstatistically significant and is probably due to increasing awareness of CJD(some cases were previously attributed to Alzheimer's or other forms ofdementia).Meanwhile, cattle are succumbing to BSE at a rate of about one per 100 everyyear.
The incubation period isalso longer than originally expected.
Veterinary experts say that almost all of the 102,000 confirmed BSE cases sofar can be attributed to scrapie-contaminated feed.
According to theirinvestigations, maternal transmission from cow to calf - which would prolongthe epidemic - is very rare or non-existent.
Recent research shows that the prion is an abnormal form of a protein thatis normally present in the brain (though its normal function is not yetknown).
Unlike viruses and bacteria, prions contain no genetic material oftheir own.
