In Washington, intelligence specialists said they believe that the jetliner may have been bombed by people seeking to retaliate against France for its recent actions in Lebanon.
Late last month, the French government sent a naval task force of five warships into Lebanese waters as part of what President Francois Mitterrand called a "rescue mission" for several thousand French nationals living in the war-torn country.
But the action was widely perceived as an attempt to provide protection and support for Maj. Gen. Michel Aoun and his Maronite Christian forces against Syrian troops and Muslim militias in Lebanon.
Ever since, one intelligence official said Wednesday, the French government has realized that its planes were being targeted for some sort of terrorist attack.
The DC-10 operated by the French airline UTA crashed Tuesday after taking off from N'Djamena, Chad, on a flight that originated in Brazzaville, Congo.
French military helicopter crews who visited the crash site in the desolate reaches of the Sahara Desert late Wednesday afternoon found no survivors.
Included among the presumed dead was the wife of the American ambassador to Chad.
The London caller linked the attack to the seizure of a Shiite cleric, Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid, by Israeli forces in southern Lebanon on July 28.
Saying he was reading a statement from Islamic Jihad, the London caller declared: "We are proud of this action, which was very successful.
We demand the freedom of Sheik Obeid, and otherwise we will refresh the memories of the bombings in Paris of '85 and '86.
A more likely possibility, speculated terrorist experts and one intelligence source in Washington, was a terrorist attack on behalf of pro-Syrian Muslim forces in Lebanon.
The French Foreign Ministry declined to comment Wednesday about the possibility of a terrorist attack.
"If there had been a very serious problem on board, other than an explosion or the sudden disintegration of the airplane," said UTA spokesman Friess, "there would have been at least several seconds or minutes for the crew to re-establish contact. "
However, in 1984 a UTA DC-8 aircraft flying the same route was damaged by a bomb explosion before takeoff at the N'Djamena airport.
Twenty-five people on board were injured in that attack, which the Chadian government blamed on Libya.
Chad-Libyan relations have recently normalized after a 10-year guerrilla war.
At the White House, Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said the U.S. government's information on Tuesday's disaster was limited.
"We can't at this time state for a fact that (the plane) was blown up, but it does have those appearances," he said.
It seems to me that there's a much stronger Middle Eastern context than an African context," Hoffman said.
He noted that by the end of August, "all the main Shiite players in Lebanon had threatened some sort of retribution against France."
On Aug. 25, a previously unknown group, the Organization in Defense of the Oppressed, threatened to strike "at French interests everywhere."
An Air France flight on Aug. 28 was delayed for more than five hours before taking off from Dulles International Airport in Washington when security officials received a last-minute bomb threat.
That wrenches the entire struggle in Lebanon onto a higher plateau," Hoffman said.
"The last battle for Beirut has yet to be fought."
Another analyst at the center, Robert Kupperman, discounted the possibility that a small terrorist group alone could have been responsible for the airborne bombing. "
Apart from Syrian-backed Lebanese forces, Kupperman suggested that Libya and Iran also could have been motivated to stage such an attack.
According to intelligence specialists, security at the airport in Chad at which the plane stopped is under the control of French officials.
However, the French do not control airport security in Brazzaville, the city from which the plane took off.
Included among the passengers was Bonnie Pugh, wife of the U.S. ambassador to Chad, Robert L. Pugh.
The ambassador's wife, who was born in Los Angeles in the 1920s and later moved to the Imperial Valley, had decided to travel ahead of her husband to help plan the October wedding of their 26-year-old daughter Anne in suburban Washington, D.C. Another passenger aboard the plane was Chadian Planning Minister Mahamat Soumaila, en route to Washington to attend a meeting of the International Monetary Fund.
Most of the passengers were African.
Times staff writer Douglas Jehl, in Washington, contributed to this story.
