Introduction: With a third presidential candidateassassinated, Colombia's government refused Friday to put off nextmonth's election and vowed to keep up the fight against drugtraffickers.
The authenticity of neither claim could be verified.
That is notthe first time there have been contradictory communiques, verbaland faxed, claiming and and then denying responsibility forassassinations and terrorist acts.
The August assassination of another candidate, Sen. Luis CarlosGalan of the governing Liberal Party, prompted the government tolaunch a U.S.-backed crackdown on Colombia's cocaine cartels.
Since then, drug traffickers have killed more than 230 people,including judges, politicians, policemen, soldiers, newspaperemployees and two other presidential candidates.
Leaders of the leftist Patriotic Union Party, whose candidatewas slain last month, urged the government to cancel the May 27vote.
But Interior Minister Horacio Serpa told reporters Friday thatthe elections will not be postponed or canceled.
On Friday, thousands of men, women and children filed pastPizarro's coffin, displayed in an open patio in the Congressbuilding.
Supporters of Pizarro's M-19 movement burned buses andthrew rocks at police in clashes in several cities.
Government officials hadsaid Pizarro could have helped mediate peace agreements with otherleftist insurgents.
The other candidates are Alvaro Gomez Hurtado and RodrigoLloreda, both of the Conservative Party.
The Patriotic Union's presidential candidate, BernardoJaramillo, was fatally wounded March 22 at the Bogota airport by anassassin with a machine gun.
Pizarro died about anhour later at a hospital.
Two men with machine guns were arrested at Barranquilla airport,a police spokesman there said.
In another development, church officials in Medellin said theyhad foiled a plan to kill Colombia's Roman Catholic prelate,Cardinal Alfonso Lopez Trujillo.
The city's Catholic church said it discovered the plan to killLopez Trujillo after intercepting messages on a radio frequencyused by the men plotting the crime.
Three men disguised as police agents entered Lopez Trujillo'soffices on Wednesday and Thursday asking for the prelate, but hewas not in, said the church statement late Thursday.
