Introduction: In a blow to California and other states with large immigrant populations, the Senate voted Friday to bar the Census Bureau from counting illegal aliens in the 1990 population count.
Pulido and other Santa Ana council members say that the 1980 census substantially under-counted its population at 215,000.
The Senate's action came on a voice vote, despite arguments from the Bush Administration and other opponents that it is both unconstitutional and unworkable.
A Senate-House conference committee will decide whether the prohibition against including illegal immigrants in the census totals will be retained or dropped from a $17.4-billion appropriations bill for the State, Justice and Commerce departments.
At stake are the number of seats in Congress for California, Florida, New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania and other states that will be reapportioned on the basis of next year's census.
Santa Ana has estimated its potential loss at $2 million a year.
In 1985, before the federal immigration reform act, the number of illegal aliens in Orange County was estimated at 229,000, ranking it just behind Los Angeles County in California, a county official said.
Councilman John Acosta said he "was saddened" by the Senate's action because the city was determined "to count every single person, and I know that (now) we're going to to suffer from this monetarily."
Loss of Seats Cited "Some states will lose congressional seats because of illegal aliens," Dole argued.
Sen. Thad Cochran (R-Miss.)
"The bottom line is illegal aliens ought to be deported, not counted," Cochran said.
"There are enormous additional costs for states who have had a surge of population," Wilson said, adding that those states should receive additional federal aid to cope with the added problems.
The Senate's action would also have an impact on smaller California cities without substantial Latino populations because census population figures play an important role in Community Development Block Grant formulas, said Don Vestal, Westminster city planner.
"We feel that it's in our best interest to get as complete a count as we can," he said.
In addition to just counting heads, they're getting economic information of the city that will affect us in the future," he added.
In recent weeks, representatives from the census office in Santa Ana have visited such social centers as Abrazar and others and told center staff people that they intend to count "everyone, regardless of where they came from," McDonough said.
"Their big thing was, 'We do not care about the origins of where these people are from, but, more importantly, their impact to local economies,' " she said.
When asked to comment, census officials in Santa Ana referred media inquiries to the regional office in Van Nuys.
"But we have a mandate to follow that law, and we would have to find out," he said.
For 190 years, said Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-N.Y.), the federal government has counted all inhabitants without regard to citizenship in accordance with the Constitution's provisions.
The Senate's action was sharply criticized by Undersecretary of Commerce Michael Darby, but he voiced hope that it would be reversed by a Senate-House conference.
But he added that he is "optimistic, cautiously optimistic," that House conferees would resist the Senate-approved ban and not force Bush to veto the legislation.
Mario Moreno, head of the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund, said he was shocked by the Senate's decision.
"It is going to have a dramatic and disastrous impact in the Hispanic community," Moreno said.
"Our position is that we count everybody at their place of residence," said bureau spokesman James Gorman.
"If Congress passes a law that says we will or will not count people, we will do what it says."
