What usually results from this ill-considered radical surgery is that the very people who scheduled the operations end up in the recovery room.
Franklin D. Roosevelt's plan to expand the Supreme Court in 1937 to dilute the votes of conservatives resulted in the creation of an opposing political coalition that lived on after the controversy to plague every subsequent Democratic President.
The latest institutional patients to be wheeled into the shock-trauma unit are the state legislatures.
The quack therapy being performed on them is the imposition of limits on the number of terms that state lawmakers can serve.
The first cut took place on Sept. 18, when Oklahoma voters endorsed overwhelmingly a ballot initiative limiting state lawmakers to 12 years' service.
By itself, the term limitation in Oklahoma might be written off as a cranky act of vengeance in a state not renowned as a political trend-setter, but similar measures will be voted on in November in California and Colorado.
Eager for straws in the wind in an otherwise trendless political year, some journalists have seen in the Oklahoma vote a backlash against incumbents, a manifestation of public alienation and an ominous sign to the Democrats, the party that holds the largest number of legislative seats.
The Oklahoma referendum is none of these.
It is, rather, the kind of minor political tempest that gets highlighted briefly by the media, is copied in a few places and then disappears.
It is Republicans, naturally enough, who seem to be the most enthusiastic puffers of term limitation, since they have the most to gain, at least in the short term, from an indiscriminate clean-out of the nation's deliberative bodies.
What makes term limitation such a singularly inappropriate tool is the almost total lack of connection between the fancied sins of the lawmakers and the discipline proposed.
Not every state lawmaker has his eye on a seat in the U.S. Senate or House of Representatives.
But it's a safe bet that more people will be using state seats to groom for higher office if they know that the law will force them out soon.
Celebrating, along with the lobbyists, will be the legislative staffs whose tenure would be unaffected.
These unelected officials are permanent and beyond the reach of voters, while the very people who are in some measure accountable will be hustled out of office.
