Introduction: The official opening of the Channel Tunnel later this year promises to helprevitalise the north-west regions of Belgium, even though the country'sbiggest ports will suffer a loss of traffic.
The chambers of commerce in Veurne and Courtrai, along with the WestFlanders Regional Development Authority in Bruges, are gearing up to becomepart of what they refer to as the 'new European Metropolitan Area.
'This takes in the Nord-Pas de Calais in France, Western Flanders and Hainautin Belgium, and Kent in the UK.The potential for this region is enormous.
'With the TGV and the chunnel this region, which was sort of in the cornerof Europe, will now be in the middle of a new developing area,' he says.
In its last economic survey of thecountry, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development said theBelgian economy had deteriorated 'progressively' since the 1980s. '
And overthe last 10 to 12 months it has taken a distinct turn for the worse.
'Furthermore, Flanders, the area most likely to benefit from the arrival ofthe tunnel, has recently suffered more rapid increases in unemployment thanin Wallonia and the Brussels region.
The Belgian chambers in the regions most directly affected believe there aretwo main areas for development: firstly, increasing traffic through westernFlanders as holidaymakers and freight carriers head towards thetunnel-opening in Calais; and secondly tourism.
Once this is done it will be possible to drive from Russia to Englandwithout leaving a motorway, says Mr Philippe Claerhout, chairman of theVeurne chamber of commerce and industry.
'Even after the doubling of the tracks and electrification of the railwayline between Ghent and De Panne, we will still be a remote corner,' says MrClaerhout.
Furthermore, Belgium's biggest ports are expecting traffic loads to fall, asfreight and passengers are directed towards Calais.
Mr Geert Sanders, who worksfor the Regional Development Authority of West Flanders, says there isalready evidence that the region's enhanced communications are attractingnew businesses.
There is, however, a danger that Belgium will not make the most of thecommercial opportunities - 'we will try to attract new industry, but ourregion is very small and our industrial zones are full,' says Mr LudoVerstraete, of the Veurne chamber of commerce.
As Mr Claerhout says: 'Weneed to convince people from other countries that it is worth their while tostop in Westhoek at the time of their journey through the North of Europe toEngland.
Ithas been slower to develop the tourist potential of the Channel Tunnel thanFrance.
