In reporting its estimated 1989 earnings, Exxon said it would take a $500-million charge in the fourth quarter for costs to clean up the spill of 11 million gallons of oil that spilled from the grounded tanker Exxon Valdez and fouled the shoreline of pristine Prince William Sound last March.
The charges reduced Exxon's 1989 net income to $3.8 billion, compared to $5.26 billion in 1988.
On Wednesday, Exxon spokesman William Smith upped the company's estimate of the spill's total costs so far -- costs to Exxon and others -- to "about $2 billion."
The fourth-quarter charge comes in addition to $880 million that the company already set aside in the first and second quarters, bringing Exxon's total cleanup costs for the year to $1.38 billion.
Other costs will be covered by "more than $400 million" in insurance, Smith said.
Analysts were not surprised at the additional charge, though "it was a lot bigger than I expected," said Joel D. Fischer, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York.
Wall Street showed little reaction to the news, with Exxon's stock falling only 12.5 cents to close at $47 a share.
That raised Exxon's income by $535 million for the year.
Without the cleanup charge and accounting gain, Exxon said its net income for the year would have been $4.7 billion, down 10.6% from 1988, despite higher oil and gas prices.
The decline resulted mainly from slimmer refining and marketing profit margins and lower earnings from chemical operations.
In the fourth quarter, earnings before the Valdez charge were $1.28 billion, compared to $1.38 billion in the 1988 quarter.
Analysts said Exxon's size would insulate it from serious long-term financial damage from the charges.
In addition, the state of Alaska has asked Exxon to reimburse it for about $34.5 million in costs; so far, Exxon has paid the state $7.4 million in cash and has agreed to pay bills amounting to $23 million more, said the state's Oil Spill Coordinating Office.
Exxon must also reimburse the U.S. Coast Guard and other federal agencies.
