This Cape Cod country road is deserted, but for the sweatysilhouette of John Kelley.
Mr. Kelley is in training for the Boston Marathon -- his60th Boston Marathon.
And even at the age of 83, he probablywill finish ahead of a large number of the 13,000 runnersexpected to compete -- officially or unofficially -- on April15.Bill Rodgers, a four-time Boston Marathon winner who plansto run again this year, marvels at Mr. Kelley: "It'sincomprehensible that a man his age is doing what he's doing.
I'm struggling at the age of 43. .
This isn't golf.
"Even the thought of running a course of 26 miles and 385yards leaves some of Mr. Kelley's rivals of yesteryeargasping. "
Ican't even remember when I ran my last marathon.
A two-time winnerin Boston (1935 and 1945) and runner-up seven times, Mr. Kelley is to be the oldest competitor in the race this year-- as he has been for 15 years.
Mr. Kelley is such an institution that Hopkinton, Mass.,where the race begins, has made him an honorary citizen.
("That means I don't have to pay taxes there," he jokes.)
Twostate troopers will run alongside the 5-foot-6, 130-pound Mr. Kelley into Boston so he won't be trampled by "groupies," ashe calls them, clamoring to shake his hand.
Then we said, `Oh no, this is niceJohnny Kelley.'
In Japan, he is awesome.
"Though he isn't the oldest person ever to enter the BostonMarathon, Mr. Kelley is the oldest to run it.
Of course, Mr. Kelley -- not to be confused with the otherJohn Kelley, who won the Boston Marathon in 1957 -- isn't therunner he was in 1935 when he won the race, in 2 hours, 32minutes, 7 seconds.
"That's not aprediction, just a goal," he says.
Today, of course, the Boston Marathon is a big deal, coveredby TV from start to finish and offering $402,000 altogetherin prize money.
"The winners get a medal and $55,000," says Mr. Kelley.
"The rosy-cheeked, supple Mr. Kelley is a medical wonder.
Each year, he visits the Cooper Clinic at the Aerobics Centerin Dallas for a battery of endurance tests. "
"What that means," explains Kenneth Cooper, the physicianwho wrote "Aerobics" and several sequels and is now at workon a book on elderly athletes, "is that Johnny has the bodyof a man 23 years younger.
He's going to be one of the starsof my book."
"But when I ran at night, I felt free.
I rantill I was exhausted.
"In 1928, when he was 21, he entered his first BostonMarathon but didn't finish.
He dropped out three-quarters ofthe way through the race.
Then, in 1933, he finished 37th ina field of about 200 runners.
Mr. Kelley well knows the jagged course from Hopkinton todowntown Boston:The first challenge comes five miles into the race, wherea set of little hills can get a psyched runner to wasteenergy charging up the slopes.
Asteep descent into Newton Lower Falls can jar a tiredrunner's bones.
Then, at the end of a long column of oak andmaple trees, is Heartbreak Hill, his nemesis.
And finally there's the HauntedMile, a stretch where many runners have collapsed.
To compensate, he trainsharder.
He used to start preparing in earnest at the end ofJanuary. "
(He doesn't count the mileshe puts in, as many long-distance runners obsessively do, buthe says he wouldn't object to an estimate of about 50 miles aweek.)Mr.
Hisroutes vary.
In January, he prefers the frozen sands of thebeach.
After his morning run, he spends a coupleof hours painting (still lifes and Cape Cod scenes), a hobbyhe took up about 25 years ago.
This ismy warm up: I empty the dishwasher, I set up the coffeepot,but I don't plug it in.
Then Icheck the outside temperature to see what clothes to wear.
"He and his wife, Laura, live in a two-bedroom ranch-stylehouse here in East Dennis, with more than 350 trophies,medals and sweat-stained marathon numbers scattered about.
Kelley aims to run till he is at least 100 years old.
The 82-year-old Mrs. Kelley adds, "I justtry to stay in his shadow, but I have a hard time even doingthat.
"In a rare moment of reflection, Mr. Kelley explains whatmakes him tick: "I paint because I like it.
I run because Ilike it.
But I'll tell you, the BostonMarathon -- with all those people waving -- is better than mybirthday.
