Introduction: This nation's volatile election was postponed today as the country was plungedinto shock and turmoil after Tuesday's assassination of former Prime MinisterRajiv Gandhi.
Gandhi, 46, a member of a family dynasty that led India forthree generations, died after a powerful bomb detonated near a campaignplatform in Sriperumbudur, about 30 miles from Madras, the capital of TamilNadu.
India's chief election commissioner, T.N.
Seshan, early this morning postponedthe remaining two phases of the national parliamentary elections until nextmonth.
He acted after consulting the president and the acting prime minister.
At least 14 other people, including a senior police officer, died in theblast.
There was no immediate indication who was responsible forthe bomb, but speculation centered on Tamil separatists seeking an independentstate in nearby Sri Lanka.
President Bush and other world leadersexpressed horror and sadness at the slaying.
Analysts here said there is no obvious successorto him as leader of the Congress Party, which was founded by his grandfather,Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, and later dominated by hismother, Indira Gandhi, who was prime minister when she was assassinated in1984.This morning, Gandhi's body was flown to a stunned New Delhi.
His widow, Sonia, sobbed and hugged the couple's daughter Priyanka as thewomen stepped down from the air force Boeing 737 that had flown them to Madrasto bring Gandhi's body home.
After theassassination, violent mobs rampaged along roads leading to Madras on Tuesdaynight, smashing vehicles and other property, according to Indian newsagencies.
Police fired shots inthe air to drive away the angry, shouting crowd.
Paswan, a member of the Janata Dal party, which defeated Gandhi's CongressParty in the 1989 general elections, was not home at the time.
Someshocked Indian political leaders told reporters they feared Rajiv Gandhi'sassassination augured the death of India's four-decades-old democracy.
Butothers, including leaders of the main rival to the Congress Party in thiselection, the Hindu revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party, denounced the killingand urged the country to remain calm in its aftermath.
"It's a tremendousloss to democracy," senior Congress leader Vasant Sathe told reporters. "
Theloss can never be made up."
J.B. Patnaik, a powerful Congress politician inthe eastern state of Orissa, said: "I don't know what is going to happen now,how democracy will survive.
"At the site of the bomb blast in Tamil Nadu,there was no immediate evidence as to who was responsible.
Gandhi and hisCongress Party have many enemies on the subcontinent, including violentseparatists in Kashmir and Punjab, leftist revolutionaries and rightist Hindumilitants.
Guerrillas suspectedMost of the early speculation, however,focused on Gandhi's most hardened opponents in Tamil Nadu, the LiberationTigers of Tamil Eelam, a disciplined and violent guerrilla force that has usedTamil Nadu as a base in its campaign to win a separate state in Sri Lanka, theisland nation just off India's southeastern coast.
Gandhi, whose Congress Party provided the mainbacking to the New Delhi government at the time, was widely seen as beingbehind the dismissal, which angered the Tamil Tigers and their supporters insouthern India.
During the current election, the Congress Party faced abrisk challenge from a leftist coalition led by former Prime Minister V.P.Singh, who denounced what he called Congress's "culture of corruption" andadvocated divisive job set-asides for India's lower castes and religiousminorities.
An even tougher test for the Congress -- and the centristideology that has held India together for four decades -- has been mounted byHindu ultranationalists from the Bharatiya Janata Party, who denounced Gandhifor allegedly pandering to India's Muslim minority and directing too manygovernment resources to religious and caste minorities in an effort to winvotes.
Election in India: turmoil and tragedyThe Congress Party, whichhas dominated Indian politics since independence in 1947, is being challengedby a center-left coalition that wants to break down the caste system and aright-wing party that seeks a more openly Hindu, less secular India.
; ...Caste systemHierarchical ranking of social groups rooted in Hindureligious beliefs that people are born with different intellectual andspiritual qualities and capabilities.
Caste is defined byvarna (rank) and jati (group within rank).
Each varna is associated with acolor.
The four varna and their colors, in order of descent:;    Brahmins: Religious leaders and scholars; whiteKshatriyas: Rulers,nobles, warriors; redVaisyas: Banking and business; yellow;   Sudras: Artisans, laborers and servants; blackBeneath thishierarchy are the Panchamas, also know as outcastes or untouchables, whoperform such tasks as tanning and leather working.
Has ruled India for all but three of its 44 years of independence.
Has about195 Parliament seats.
Janata Dal: Led by former prime minister, V.P.Singh.
Party hasgrown significantly since 1984, when it won 2 out of 542 Parliament seats.
In1989 , it won 85 out of 543 seats.
Has about 50 seats in Parliament.
; ...India's politicalbloodlines;    Rajiv Gandhi;    1944-1991Became prime minister in 1984after assassination of Indira Gandhi.
;    ... Indira Gandhi;   1917-1984Prime minister from 1966-'77 and from 1980 until assassinated bySikh militants.
;    ...Jawaharlal Nehru;    1889 -1964India's first prime minister, 1947-1964.Associate of Mohandas Gandhi.
Considered father of country.
Assassinated by Hindu fanatic.
