Introduction: An unqualified mate was piloting the Exxon Valdez -- violating both Coast Guard regulations and company policy -- when the tanker crashed into rocks, unleashing the worst oil spill in U.S. history, Exxon Shipping Co. said Sunday.
Wildlife experts were summoned from California to coordinate any efforts to rescue birds and sea otters, whose feathers and fur make them the most vulnerable to oil contamination.
Killer whales, sea lions and ducks also have been spotted swimming in the muck.
Steve Cowper declared Prince William Sound a disaster area, freeing state resources for cleanup and paving the way for a federal disaster declaration.
Frank Iarossi, president of Exxon Shipping, told reporters that Capt.
At no time did the ship lose steering, he added.
There would have been no reason for the 42-year-old captain to go below to use the bathroom or get coffee, since both are available on the bridge, Iarossi said.
"I agree something is missing," Iarossi told reporters and local residents at a press conference.
Cousins, a three-year employee of Exxon, did not have the Coast Guard certification required to pilot through the sound but was qualified under other circumstances to steer the ship, Iarossi said.
"The Coast Guard may seem slow and plodding at times, but if we file charges, we're going to make them stick," he added.
Exxon has not made any of the Exxon Valdez's 20 crew members available for interviews.
The Coast Guard served subpoenas Saturday on the captain, helmsman and third mate to ensure that they make themselves available to investigators.
A team from the National Transportation Safety Board arrived Sunday to probe the cause of the accident.
"Human life and safety is more important," said Pamela Bergmann, the Department of the Interior representative assessing the situation.
She said it might be too perilous to try to capture panicky birds and otters from boats in the frigid water, and there is no road access to the shores where they are likely to show up.
Fish and Wildlife Service said he felt encouraged about impact on the area's abundant marine life after patrolling the 50-square-mile slick by boat Saturday.
Winds of up to 35 m.p.h.
were expected by today.
Neither Exxon nor the state and federal agencies involved in the operation could say how much oil had been mopped up or what percentage of the slick is contained.
Pumps were being used to siphon the remaining oil into a sister tanker Sunday, an operation expected to take up to a week.
Salvagers hope the two-year-old Exxon Valdez will be able to float free once its load is lightened.
No disciplinary action has been taken against any crew members, Iarossi said.
So far, oil has washed ashore only on two tiny islands in the sound, and beach cleanup efforts were under way.
At Coast Guard offices here, Nelson said such a move was unlikely. "
The Coast Guard doesn't have tons and tons of its own equipment, and it would have to hire the same people Exxon has," Nelson said.
Right now, Exxon is the oil company with the deep pockets, and it's cleaning up its own spill within federal guidelines."
