A 35 percent increase in tuberculosis in 1989 in Newark, N.J.,has caught the attention of health officials, who had beenpreviously recording with satisfaction a slow, steady decrease inTB cases over the last few decades.
Hopewell and other health officials discussed the link betweenAIDS and TB during the a four-day World Conference on Lung Healthin Boston, which ends Wednesday.
Dixie E. Snider Jr., director of the division of tuberculosiscontrol at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
Snider stressed that tuberculosis, unlike AIDS, is a curabledisease and called for TB screenings at drug rehabilitationprograms, prisons or other places where AIDS tests are beingadministered.
Snider also said doctors should administer TB tests to allpersons testing positive for the HIV virus since TB may not bereadily diagnosed in AIDS patients.
In Wyoming, the Centers for Disease Control recorded no newcases of TB in 1989, demonstrating that it is a condition that canbe controlled and cured, according to Dr. Lee B. Reichman, directorof the pulmonary division of the University of Medicine andDentistry in New Jersey.
Untreated, tuberculosiskills about 50 percent of its victims within two years, accordingto the Centers for Disease Control.
However, he noted that therehad been an increase in positive TB tests among AIDS health workers.
Snider said 10 million to 15 million Americans have beeninfected with the tuberculosis germ, but only a small percentage ofthem develop the disease because their immune system was strongenough to prevent the disease from developing.
If, however, a person's immune system is impaired by poornutrition or weakened by the HIV virus, people can develop activeTB.
``TB is long known as an opportunistic organism,'' Hopewell said.
Snider said there has been a 150 percentincreased in cases of TB among young blacks in New York City.
Reichman noted that most American have forgotten about theproblems of TB; from 1981 to 1984, TB cases declined an average of6 percent per year according to the Centers for disease control.
But, he said, ``TB is back with a vengeance.''
While associated with poverty and crowded living conditions, TBthrough history has ravaged both the poor and the famous.
TBvictims include Henry David Thoreau, Washington Irving, FranzKafka, Ring Lardner, Somerset Maugham and Vivien Leigh.
