The spill of some 270,000 barrels _ or 11.3 million gallons _occurred early Friday when the 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez wenthard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 miles outside Valdez, thenorthermost ice-free port in the United States.
Coast Guard spokesman Ed Wieliczkiewicz said the use ofchemicals to disperse and sink the heavy North Slope crude oilfailed because the agents depend in part on rough seas to break upthe oil.
Early Friday the Exxon Valdez was losing 20,000 gallons of oilper hour, but the flow slowed to a trickle later.
An oil slick snaked about five miles from the ship as wind andtide pushed the crude oil into the sound and away from shore.
Gov.
Hesaid the vessel steered from its course to avoid chunks of ice anddid not return to its normal traffic lane.
Dan Lawn, an engineer for the state Department of EnvironmentalConservation, said the captain could not steer the Exxon Valdezback on course in time to avoid a collision.
Lawn likened the ship's situation to ``trying to park a Cadillacin a Volkswagen spot.''
Divers were to check the ship's hull and their findings were tobe used in making plans for the removal of crude oil still aboardthe vessel.
``A spill of this size in such a complex environment promises tobe a cleanup nightmare,'' said Golob, a Cambridge, Mass.-basedconsultant whose firm has studied oil spills and environmentaldisasters for 15 years.
In Washington, Interior Department spokesman Steve Goldsteinsaid efforts had begun to evacuate waterfowl, sea otters and otherwildlife from the danger area.
The Exxon Valdez had loaded 1.2 million barrels of oil at theAlyeska Pipeline Service Co. marine terminal at Valdez and was enroute to Long Beach, Calif., when it crunched onto the reef.
It relies on the fishing, oil and tourism industries.
The soundis considered a playground for kayakers, sport fishermen andtourists.
The fishingindustry is between seasons.
Wells said the black cod fishery is scheduled to begin April 1,but the region's major herring fishery is not expected to get underway until mid-April.
The largest tanker spill in history was in the July 19, 1979,collision off Tobago of the supertankers Atlantic Empress andAegean Captain, in which 300,000 tons _ more than 80 milliongallons _ of oil was lost.
