They press fingers under their noses.
They dig their knuckles into protesters' necks, and torque martial arts weapons around their wrists.
At one point, two officers twist a woman's arm till she rises from the ground, her face wrenched in agony.
But opponents call the term a euphemism for torture.
Other conservative lawmakers have echoed his concerns, and on Nov. 15, with little media attention, President Bush signed legislation withholding certain federal grants from cities whose police use excessive force.
Meanwhile, police officers, many of whom are sympathetic to the anti-abortion cause, claim that religious zeal -- and perhaps the use of muscle relaxants -- has given Operation Rescue anti-abortion protesters an unusually high tolerance to pain -- or even a martyr's appetite for it.
"I think it's utter stupidity," Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates said.
In reaction to the uproar, the LAPD is quickly phasing out the term pain-compliance, but not the techniques, which have been used "in civil rights demonstrations, student demonstrations, Vietnam demonstrations .
His officers, he added, are as well-trained in the use of these holds as any in the country.
Fred Nichols, the academy's expert on the use of force.
Pain-compliance techniques fit into the scale above talk but below the use of a Taser gun, tear gas, and the police baton.
Among the most simple "come-along" compliance techniques are twist- and wrist-locks, in which a subject's arm or wrists are manipulated so that soft tissue and nerves press against bone, Nichols said.
Another trick of the trade: the "mastoid lift," in which officers press the nerves along each side of the neck.
But while some Operation Rescue demonstrators use a standard civil-disobedience technique and "go limp" when asked to move, others link arms.
They become "human worm-balls" and make themselves tense, rendering standard compliance techniques ineffective, officers say.
Trying to carry away protesters in these cases becomes even more dangerous to them and arresting officers, police say.
So LAPD and other police forces around the country, including several in Orange County and the San Diego Police Department, began using a modified martial arts tool called a nunchaku -- now termed a "police control device" -- consisting of two 12-inch lengths of plastic connected by a length of nylon.
The gentlest twist triggered enough pain to make the recruit comply promptly.
Police actually plead with Operation Rescue demonstrators in some cases, he said.
It's a pain control technique," he said.
"It's going to hurt.
As a result, they have filed lawsuits against police in Los Angeles, Sacramento, Atlanta and other cities.
Nichols and other officers are suspicious of Operation Rescue's charges.
"The first time pressure is applied, most people fall to the ground," Nichols said.
You say, something's wrong here."
In the 25 years that he has been a policeman, Capt.
Operation Rescue protesters stand out, he said.
But pain has a purpose.
It's telling you to stop doing what you're doing.
If you don't respond to pain, and it is applied with more force, injuries are possible. "
In fact, injuries have been mounting ever since police and Operation Rescue protesters squared off at the 1988 Democratic convention in Atlanta.
* In West Hartford, Conn., officers removed their badges and name tags -- purportedly to avoid cutting demonstrators -- and then allegedly hauled protesters away with come-along holds, by lifting them with sharp-edged plastic handcuffs, or with "crotch carries" in which a night stick is stuck between the protester's legs.
A woman arrested this year in Los Angeles said: "By the time they got my arms all the way back the pain was so intense I was just screaming .
Jesus!
Jesus!'
" In demonstrations in those cities and others, including Boston, Atlanta and Denver, protesters alleged that officers continued to apply come-along holds after demonstrators had complied with their commands, administering pain as a form of "curbside justice."
"It wasn't at all like the old anti-war demonstrations where people were calling the police pigs, being belligerent," said Dan Bruno, an accountant for the city of Orange, whose right wrist was broken at a March 25 Los Angeles demonstration.
"Frankly, I lead a very middle-class life.
I've never been roughed up like that before.
Maybe I just got a little insight into what it was like to be a black demonstrating for civil rights."
Rather, leaders began an aggressive letter-writing campaign, encouraging those who felt they had been abused and people who saw videotapes of the abuse to file complaints against the officers, and write to their senators, congressmen, the Department of Justice, and the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.
A group called Pro-Life Police was formed, and a member testified that he had witnessed "real atrocities" by the LAPD.
But others said the LAPD had behaved with restraint.
The pain inflicted on women's lives by Operation Rescue people is enormous.
At demonstrations, throngs of pro-choice demonstrators, some of whom might well have been on the wrong end of night sticks in another era, watched the police twist protesters' arms and chanted: "L.A. blue, we're with you."
"I felt like the people in the stands were cheering as we threw the Christians to the lions," he said.
He also has charged that his media colleagues have turned their backs on the uncomfortably complex issue.
But you never know how tolerant you are until you're challenged on something you care about.
This issue has touched some very raw nerves, and we find we're not as tolerant as we pretend to be."
At a commission briefing on police brutality charges, organized by Allen in September, Robert McCue, chief of the West Hartford police, defended his officers.
"I have never heard of training that consists of using stretchers for one class of prisoner and come-along holds for others based on the motivation of a crime," he said.
"All I want my officers to think of at the time that they're taking somebody into custody is the resistance to the arrest.
An amendment introduced by conservative lawmakers in the House and Senate, and tagged onto a HUD bill later signed by the President, states that no Community Planning and Development grants may be paid "to any municipality that fails to adopt and enforce a policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by law enforcement agencies within the jurisdiction of said municipality against any individuals engaged in nonviolent civil rights demonstrations."
"This is what the Democrats used to do all the time, blackmailing cities into doing what the federal government wants it to do," said Gates.
But if this "horrendous" new measure has its intended effect, eliminating the use of painful control techniques in nonviolent demonstrations, his department may have no choice but to watch as demonstrators of any stripe take over any facility they choose, he said.
Carol Sobel, staff attorney for the Los Angeles Chapter of the ACLU, shares Gates' assessment that the government acted in this case because conservative lawmakers were sympathetic to the anti-abortion cause.
But, unlike Gates, she believes that using pain-compliance against any nonviolent demonstrator is often "barbaric," and she supports restraints on the police.
Sobel was "amused" at how quickly lawmakers addressed complaints of police brutality that, she said, have been raised for years by protesters against U.S. policy in El Salvador by members of the Revolutionary Communist Party and other groups generally viewed less sympathetically by conservatives.
Still, she believes the new measure will help assure "that the cost of demonstrating in this town doesn't escalate.
Jim Cady in the Times Editorial Library assisted in the research for this article.
