Rising welfare spending has been a significant factor in the averageincrease in net state borrowing of 3 percentage points of GDP across theOECD between 1989 and 1992.In the longer term, there are fears that the cost of the welfare state couldbecome insupportable as populations age over the next 50 years.
While short-term measures may ease the immediate budgetary pressures, morefundamental reforms will be needed if the welfare state is not to underminethe economic performance that has underpinned its enormous expansion sincethe second world war.
Total government spending in the OECD countries hasrisen from 28.1 per cent of GDP in 1960 to 43.8 per cent in 1990.
Thebiggest element in this growth has been the cost of pensions, healthcare,unemployment benefits and family support.
Social security payments more thandoubled during this period, from 7 per cent of GDP to 15.4 per cent.
Healthexpenditure also doubled, from 3.9 per cent to 7.8 per cent.
Expenditure has risen rapidly in recent decades,more than doubling its average share of GDP in OECD countries since 1960.Pensions typically account for about a quarter of the increase in publicexpenditure over this period.
The rise in the number of elderly people.
Improvements in pension benefits, such as automatic increases to matchrising earnings.
The ageing of the population has alsocontributed to rising costs, though not as much as for pensions.
Rising unemployment has added to the cost of the welfare state in bothunemployment benefits and general family support for low-income families.
Most OECD countries have recognised the need to curb growth in these mainareas of welfare spending during the 1980s, and have introduced policies totackle the underlying causes.
For example, governments have become much lesswilling to offer improvements in pensions.
Although there are considerabledifferences between national health systems, healthcare reforms in countriessuch as the UK and the Netherlands are increasingly converging on modelsthat use competition and price incentives to control costs.
Many countries have also begun to tighten up on unemployment benefits, withreductions in benefit levels and more rigorous conditions to qualify.
The most important of these is demography.
Thenumber of over-65s in the 24 OECD member states rose from 61m in 1960 tomore than 100m in 1990.The growth is accelerating, with the number projected to rise to more than115m in 2000, 131m in 2010 and 156m by 2020.
For the OECD as a whole,the age dependency ratio is predicted to rise from about 19 per cent in 1990to 28 per cent by 2020 and 37 per cent by 2040.Some countries face much greater pressures from the ageing of theirpopulations than others.
Germany and Japan, for example, will both have agedependency ratios of 34 per cent by 2020 - one person over the age of 65 forevery three people between 15 and 64.
Age dependency ratios will climb more slowly in the UK and US, to about 25per cent in 2020 - four people of working age to support every elderlyperson.
In both countries, ratios will peak at about 33 per cent in 2040.The most immediate impact of these demographic changes will be on pensions,where costs will in any case rise as pension schemes continue to mature.
However, raising pensions by more than prices would either require muchhigher growth rates or higher taxes for those in work to pay the bill.
The impact of an ageing population on healthcare costs is less clear-cut.
Other changes in social structure are also pushing up the demands on thewelfare state.
Throughout the OECD, for example, the number of lone-parentfamilies has been rising since the 1960s.
In some countries, the increasehas been relatively moderate - 20 per cent or less in countries such asFrance, Japan and Switzerland.
At the other extreme, the increase hasexceeded 50 per cent in the UK and Australia.
In the US the number has morethan doubled.
Lone-parent families now typically constitute 10-15 per centof of all families with children in OECD countries.
In the US it is one infour families.
Added to concerns over demography and social change are fears over theincrease in unemployment levels across the OECD.
This ratchet effect has worried the Group of Seven leading industrialcountries sufficiently for an employment summit to be hosted by PresidentClinton in the coming months.
Responses to these cost pressures vary from country to country.
Where the cost of welfare is jointly funded by employers -as in Germany - higher contributions are also increasingly resisted bybusiness, which fears the consequences for international competitiveness ofhigher costs.
An alternative response to cost pressures would be further increases inborrowing to fund the welfare state.
But that would also have deleteriouseffects, according to the OECD.
Average government debt in OECD countrieshas risen from 23 per cent of GDP in 1979 to 44 per cent in 1992.Without either tax rises or cuts in welfare budgets, current welfarespending plans could increase debt ratios on average by 90 percentage pointsover the next 40 years, according to one OECD study.
The OECD's immediate priorities for reform include charges forthe use of some welfare services and greater competition to increase theefficiency of those services.
But the OECD has also drawn attention to the need for action to anticipatethe funding implications of the rise in the number of elderly people.
And the demandsput on the welfare state might be eased by encouraging more privateprovision of pensions and healthcare.
From providing support 'from the cradle to the grave', itwould become a safety net for those who could not afford to provide forthemselves.
As countries become wealthier, moving the boundary between the state'sresponsibilities and those of the individual in this way may be a naturalstep.
But it would be politically controversial.
Yet it is increasingly clear that there is no alternative to fundamentalreforms if advanced economies are to protect their most vulnerable citizenswithout imposing unacceptable burdens on economic performance.
But a new glue will beneeded over the next 50 years if advanced economies are to pass beyond thewelfare state.
