Introduction: A crippled United Airlines DC-10 crashed a half-mile short of a runway while trying to make an emergency landing Wednesday afternoon, bursting into a cartwheeling fireball that broke into what one eyewitness described as "15,000 pieces" and killing at least 123 of the 293 passengers and crew members on board.
Remarkably, as many as 166 persons survived the violent crash, according to Richard Vohs, a spokesman for Iowa Gov.
Terry E. Branstad.
Tail Engine Explodes The plane's tail engine exploded before the crash but it was not immediately clear how the explosion contributed to what a Federal Aviation Administration spokesman called "complete hydraulic failure," an occurrence regarded as extremely rare in the wide-bodied DC-10, which has three independent hydraulic systems that operate all the plane's control surfaces on its wings and tail, and landing gear and brakes.
As rescuers worked underneath floodlights to remove bodies from the crash site, original estimates of the death toll -- one as high as 190, which would have made the crash the second worst in U.S. history -- were reduced.
"But right now, the number (of survivors) confirmed is 166."
The survivors of Wednesday's United Flight 232 from Denver to Philadelphia via Chicago included several dozen passengers who managed to walk out of a dark, smoke-filled, upside-down section of the jet after it broke off and came to rest in a tall cornfield off the runway.
"We were all walking around in shock.
I just walked through it like it was a dream.
I was a little dazed."
The search for bodies was difficult because some of them were scattered in the cornfield.
United Airlines declined to comment on the number of survivors or to release the names of the 282 passengers and 11 crew members.
Eyewitnesses said pieces of the 15-year-old airplane -- one of the oldest airliners in United's fleet -- were falling off as far as 75 miles from the site of the crash.
A team of National Transportation Safety Board investigators left Washington Wednesday night for Sioux City.
The hydraulic system that disintegrated Wednesday works the same way a power steering system operates in a car.
There were reports from passengers and observers that the plane's right-wing engine also failed before the crash.
In what survivors described as a heroic effort that nearly succeeded, the plane's Seattle-based captain, A. C. Haynes -- a 33-year veteran of the airline who along with the other 10 crew members survived the crash -- struggled for a half-hour to maintain control of the wobbling plane.
Radio transmission indicated the plane's maneuverability was limited to right-hand turns.
Preparing for Crash Landing "Then they said we were preparing for a crash landing.
They said it would be about 30 seconds, but it was about five minutes," another passenger said.
At about 4 p.m. CDT, the plane made its final approach.
Onlookers watched hopefully.
"We thought it was going to make it," said Glen Olson, city editor of the Sioux City Journal.
It didn't.
The wing hit the ground a half-mile before the runway.
"I think it turned over a couple of times.
I think it landed upside down," said passenger Melanie Cincala of Toledo, Ohio, who said the plane burst into flames after she got off.
Huge clouds of smoke and flames billowed upward as firemen sprayed foam over the wreckage.
"We were sitting there upside down and it began to fill up with smoke," said Cliff Marshall of Columbus, Ohio, who was returning home from Denver. '
Marshall said he thought he helped a half-dozen out and then he ran.
He had just landed in another plane.
He said the living were scattered among the dead. "
In one group of six seats, a woman sitting in the middle was barely injured, her husband beside her was dead and two behind her were dead," Bendixen said.
From looking at one or two of them you wouldn't know they were in the accident," Graham said.
Their clothes were clean, not mussed, their hair was in place and they had no scratches he could see, he said.
Lavonne Quirin of Alta, in Buena Vista County, 75 miles from the airport, said she and her husband found a cone-shaped section of the plane in a cornfield at their seed corn business. '
McDonnell Douglas Corp., which builds the DC-10, said the plane was delivered to United in 1974.
United, the nation's second largest airline, has one of the oldest fleets in the industry.
The average age of its aircraft is 13.5 years.
No unusual weather was reported.
A DC-10 was involved in the nation's worst air crash 10 years ago.
On May 25, 1979, American Airlines Flight 191 lost an engine on takeoff, banked sideways out of control, slammed into a field and exploded.
All 258 passengers and 13 crew members died, as well as two people on the ground.
McDonnell Douglas suspended production of the DC-10 airliner in 1983.
Nine persons were hurled to their deaths last Feb. 24 when a cargo door popped open in flight, tearing a gaping hole in a United Boeing 747 jetliner.
Turns Up Deficiencies The accident probe has turned up deficiencies in United's procedures regarding the cargo doors.
On July 10, a United Boeing 747 was forced to make an emergency landing at Miami International Airport after the plane was damaged in heavy turbulence over the Florida-Georgia border.
On Tuesday, a United DC-10 with 249 people aboard slid 300 yards on the runway after landing at rain-soaked O'Hare International Airport in Chicago but there were no injuries.
Last Dec. 23, a United DC-10 bound for Chicago with 287 passengers had engine problems after takeoff and dumped 52,000 gallons of fuel over the Pacific before returning safely to Los Angeles.
The second-worst crash in U.S. history was an Aug. 16, 1987, crash that killed 156 people when a Northwest Airlines jet crashed on takeoff at Detroit Metropolitan Airport.
J. Michael Kennedy reported from Sioux City and Bob Baker from Los Angeles.
Page 17 RESCUE TEAMS READY -- The Sioux City, Iowa, fire-and-rescue operations had practiced for a major emergency.
