Newspaper headlines have documented Miami's subsequent hurricanes.
The citywas "Lashed" in '47, "Slammed" in '49 and "Pounded" in '50.
What would one of those legendarystorms of the past with 200 mph winds pushing huge tidal surges do to thislow-lying metropolis on the Atlantic?
Hurricane seasonofficially extends from June 1 through Nov. 30, and scientists at the NationalHurricane Center, tucked away on the sixth floor of a nondescript officebuilding in this Miami suburb, are perking up after another winter lull.
In this part of the world,technology has made obsolete such disasters as the unnamed hurricane thatsurprised Galveston, Texas, in 1900, killing 6,000 people.
The hurricanespecialists use the nation's only working geostationary weather satellite tofollow developing storms.
One of the specialists, Lixion Avila, hasbegun counting tropical waves that form off the coast of Africa every few daysduring hurricane season.
About 60 of these waves of air, not water, form everyyear.
About 20 of them intensify into stronger disturbances, ranging fromtropical depressions, with wind speeds to 38 mph; to tropical storms, withwinds from 39 to 73 mph; to hurricanes, with winds exceeding 74 mph.
Fourteen becametropical storms, seven of which became hurricanes, fewer than usual.
People who venture into such dubious endeavors as long-term hurricaneforecasting said this could be another light year.
One such year was 1935-- only six hurricanes formed, but one was the strongest to hit the continent.
Miami has grown immensely since the last major storm and is greatlyoverdue, they said.
"Historically, south Florida has had more hurricanesthan any other site," said Jerry Jarrell, a hurricane specialist eyeingMiami's 27-year hiatus nervously.
"At the center, scientistsbuilt a computer model to calculate what would happen if the 1926 hurricanewere to hit Miami today.
That storm was almost exactly the strength ofHurricane Hugo, which hit in South Carolina with 135 mph winds in September1989.
None.
"A worst-case storm,with winds topping 150 mph, would put 5 feet of water in Joe's Stone Crabsrestaurant, a Miami Beach landmark, and 9 feet of water on Biscayne Boulevardin downtown Miami.
Hurricanes changedirection and intensify in a matter of hours and, in 24 hours, the specialistssaid, they could miscalculate one's track by 100 miles.
"The fire department did a survey, and 90 percent ofthe people they talked to said they wouldn't evacuate for a hurricane,"Mayfield said.
