Introduction: The label "black conservative," now firmly affixed to Clarence Thomas' name,does not begin to tell the story of his life, an American story oftransformation.
Born barnyard poor in segregated Georgia, forsaken bytheir father, Thomas and his brother were reared by strict Bible-believinggrandparents who taught him to never say, "I can't."
Thomas and his brother made it in the white world.
Their sister, reared byan aunt, had four children and went on welfare.
In a hostile world, they taught himto rely on himself.
They shaped his views on individualism, race and society,views that guide him today.
"I was raised to survive under thetotalitarianism of segregation," Thomas wrote in a paper for the HeritageFoundation, a conservative public policy institute in Washington.
"Those who attempt to capture the daily counseling,oversight, common sense and vision of my grandparents in a governmentalprogram are engaging in sheer folly.
Yet as Washington Post journalist JuanWilliams has pointed out, Thomas is firmly grounded in the black intellectualtradition of Booker T. Washington, who advocated education, self-reliance andmutual support as the principal means of advancement.
Clarence Thomas wasborn June 23, 1948, in Pinpoint, Ga., a town in the marshes near Savannah.
His mother remarried, and her second husband did not want thechildren of her first marriage.
But life had taught him a lot.
"Hecould barely read and write -- read enough to read the Bible," Thomas said ina 1983 interview with the Washington Post. "
"He elaborated in the Heritage Foundation paper: "Of course, I thought mygrandparents were too rigid and their expectations were too high.
"But the world that lay beyond the confines of poverty and segregation was nottotally closed to Thomas.
On Monday, Thomas also made sure to thank"the nuns.
"As a young man, he wanted to become a priest.
He was in for a shock.
Disgusted, he left at the end of his firstyear.
But his trueinterest was in the law.
By then, Danforth was a Republicansenator.
In 1982, after a year as assistant education secretary forcivil rights, Thomas was named by President Reagan to lead the EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission.
Hetook his seat on the appeals court in March 1990.Thomas, who lives insuburban Virginia, is married and has a son.
