But De Beers not only halted a fall in rough-diamond prices, it raised them an average 14.5% last year.
De Beers managed the comeback by convincing diamond producers, dealers and the jewelry industry that its marketing muscle was indispensable.
"Selling diamonds is the business of dealers and jewelers; helping them to sell more is ours," says Stephen Lussier, a De Beers marketing executive.
De Beers helped with an advertising and promotion budget that swelled to $110 million this year, up from $43 million in 1980.
Supplemented by $20 million spent by the diamond trade, the De Beers campaign helped raise world sales of diamond jewelry to 47 million pieces valued at $21.6 billion in 1985, up from 42 million pieces valued at $16 billion in 1979.
The promotional budget covers market research, a world-wide network of as many as 200 public-relations officials, and advertising campaigns coordinated by the agencies N.W.
The master sales plan began in 1938, when former De Beers Chairman Harry Oppenheimer asked Ayer to woo American couples to buy expensive diamond engagement rings.
About three-fourths of American women own diamond engagement rings that cost an average $1,300.
One out of 17 Japanese couples bought engagement rings two decades ago.
The Syndicate has purchase contracts with De Beers's own mines in South Africa and Namibia (a territory controlled by South Africa), other African states such as Botswana, Zaire and Sierra Leone, and Australia.
The dealer must accept or reject the entire box, valued at between $1 million and $25 million.
If the dealer refuses to buy, De Beers may never invite him back.
The cartel hasn't cut prices since it was founded more than half a century ago.
Despite grumbling, diamond dealers generally believe that a healthy international diamond market depends on the Syndicate.
But De Beers is unique, he says, in influencing production and consumption of diamonds.
"People mesmerized by the producers' cartels forget that De Beers is an aggressive, ruthless and effective sales organization," says a London dealer.
Some analysts warn, however, that De Beers's future may be affected by the surge in diamond output elsewhere, notably Australia.
World diamond production has soared to 88 million carats from 47 million carats in 1982.
About 20% of the prize diamonds are produced in southern Africa, but the market is being flooded by cheaper diamonds mainly from Australia and Zaire.
Other African nations in the cartel want more control over distribution, dealers say.
"De Beers can't stop evolution," says Jack Lunzer, chairman of IDC Holdings Ltd., a London-based diamond firm that sells diamonds for Guinea, an African nation that isn't a cartel member.
While sales independence from De Beers "could be disastrous" for the market, Mr. Lunzer says, that won't deter those producers who want "more information and knowledge about final sales of their material."
In 1981, Zaire, which mines 22% of world diamond output, left the cartel.
Australia was about to open a huge diamond mine and a speculative boom had led to widespread dealer bankruptcies.
The monopoly was threatened with extinction.
While average prices of De Beers's rough diamonds rose 37%, prices of polished diamonds in dealers' stocks collapsed.
The top-grade investment diamond, D-Flawless, tumbled to around $8,000 a carat in 1985 from an average of $55,000 in 1980.
De Beers is powerful; it is everywhere," says Alfred Lachowsky, chairman of the Antwerp Diamond High Council.
