Introduction:   Inside a small motor home , JoannePierluissi raised her sleeve as nurse Mary Perez inserted a needleinto the vein above her forearm, drawing blood into a tube for adiabetes test.
As her daughters watched, Pierluissi, 24, said it was for them,as much as for herself, that she agreed to be tested for the deadlykiller of Hispanics.
Hispanics are three times as likely to developdiabetes as the general population, and 40 percent of the 700,000victims in Texas are Mexican-American.
No one really knows what sparks it, but researchers believeHispanics could hold the key.
San Antonio's Hispanic makeup led Dr. Ralph DeFronzo to abandonhis prestigious position as a Yale University diabetes researcherand persuade his four-member team to relocate to the University ofTexas Health Science Center.
Type II, the most common form, develops mostly in obese adultsover 40 who also may have a family history of the disease.
Type I diabetes usually develops among adolescents and requiresthat they have daily injections of insulin.
``Then you could go out andzero in on the genetic susceptibles and you can be more intense onyour recommendations to them and you could also study that group.''
``We don't know why, when they get diabetes, they have a moresevere form of the disease _ whether it's a biological difference oris it that they are not getting as good medical care.
Between 1979 and 1988, Stern and his staff studied more than5,000 people and found that 387 of 2,905 Hispanics had the disease,or 13.3 percent, compared to only 87 of 1,780 Anglos, or 4.8 percent.
Teresa Castro, 54, whose diabetic husband died at age 37, wentthrough the screening eight years ago.
She was told that because ofher weight, 254 pounds, she had hypertension and was at risk ofdiabetes.
``I went to the screening because they called and said it wasfree.
That's why I went to it, because being poor I couldn't affordto go to the doctor for this type of checkup,'' she said.
``Mymother has diabetes and they tell me I might have diabetes, too, butI don't know too much about it.
``I feel OK, but they tell me that one year you can be OK and thenext year, it can be totally different.''
DeFronzo, who in 1988 was chosen the top diabetes investigator byCanadian and Japanese diabetes associations, says his unit at theHealth Science Center will try to use many of Stern's patients forresearch.
That will include work for Lipha Chemicals, which makes ananti-diabetic drug called metaforim that improves the body's abilityto respond to insulin.
``The problem with Type II diabetics is not that they don't makeenough insulin; they don't respond to the insulin,'' DeFronzo said.``What we'd like to do is make them more responsive and this drugwill do that.''
use, he said.
Educating elementary-school-age children about healthy dietswould help reduce the number of diabetes cases, DeFronzo said.
``So you have to design an exercise program that is compatiblewith the patient's lifestyle and it is something they can do.
