Introduction: World Bank President Barber Conable was so well regarded during his 20-year career as a Republican congressman from New York that some journalists nicknamed him "H.R."
-- for "highly respected."
Rep. Tom Foley, a liberal Democrat from Washington State, calls him "a very strong asset" to the 151-nation institution "because of the enormous respect he has on both sides of the aisle."
But at the World Bank, Mr. Conable finds himself under fire.
After a year and a half in office, he has failed to move the bank into a leadership role on the Third World debt problem. "
The World Bank has been reluctant to step out on this issue in confrontation and conflict with the Treasury," charges Sen. Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat and Congress's leading voice on the debt problem.
"There surely is a much larger role for the World Bank in the debt problem than it has played so far, but they just can't get out ahead of the administration," he says.
While the debt morass has deepened, Mr. Conable's World Bank has looked inward, shuffling its organization charts around in a disruptive reorganization and then campaigning for a $74.8 billion increase in its capital.
As Congress considers the increase, liberal critics on Capitol Hill are demanding that Mr. Conable show he is ready to use the bank's vast resources to make some direct impact on reducing the huge burden of Third World debt.
House Democrats, in fact, cut out of the foreign-aid bill passed last month all $70 million the administration had sought for the first year of the U.S. share of the increase in capital.
The deletion was made pending action by a committee looking into the bank's approach to the debt crisis.
So far, Mr. Conable has approached the debt crisis more like a cautious financier than a bold politician.
He has clung to the bank's traditional role of a conventional lender and adviser to developing nations and has deferred on ideas about the debt to the man who picked him for his job -- U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker.
Mr. Conable subscribes to the "Baker Plan," which stresses new lending by commercial banks and the World Bank to debtor countries that adopt growth-oriented, market-based economic reforms.
The bank has tried to help the countries by tiding them over with some new loans.
Even the World Bank's longtime financial wizard, Eugene Rotberg -- who quit the bank for Merrill Lynch over Mr. Conable's reorganization plan -- proposed last month that the World Bank guarantee new 20-year commercial-bank loans to Third World countries.
Defending his approach to the debt problem, Mr. Conable explains: "We aren't a financial institution but a development institution.
We can't go to our member countries and say, 'Give us a tremendous capital increase so we can assume the obligations of all these other creditors that a developing country owes.'
There is a lack of intellectual leadership within the bank itself."
While financial experts often urge the bank to do more, the ponderous institution has intervened only about half a dozen times in debt crises, usually just to guarantee a small portion of a commercial-bank loan package.
Mr. Conable makes it clear that it won't do that often.
But the U.S. Treasury was firmly opposed to the idea, saying it was unnecessary in Brazil's case and might foster the impression that such guarantees should be common.
They want Barber to subscribe to it, and I think that he sees that it's a bad idea."
Also within the bank's own ranks, there is talk that could lead to a more aggressive role on debt once President Reagan leaves office. "
"Perhaps we have excessively underplayed our own role."
He adds, "It seems to me it will be desirable, in the present environment, to see what can be done" to reduce debt, rather than just lend new money.
Partly in response to the external and internal pressures, Mr. Conable sent a debt study to his board early in April.
"The likelihood is that the bank will need to play a more extensive and diversified role in two areas: new money packages and facilitating other forms of financial relief, including debt-reduction schemes," declares the study, which was drafted by David Bock, a vice president and the bank's debt expert.
But conspicuously absent from the report, which discussed debt-relief proposals from Secretary Baker, Sen. Bradley and others, were any ideas from the bank itself.
The idea of the bank was to finance a wide range of economically basic construction across the developing world: roads in Africa, power projects in Asia, schools in Latin America, irrigation in India.
Under A.W.
Under Mr. Conable, a low-key, thoughtful man with a self-deprecating sense of humor, new policies have been harder to discern.
He has continued to increase the quick-disbursing, non-project loans but hasn't introduced any new type of lending.
He also has set a goal for alleviating poverty in Asia and has won new financing to help the poor countries of Africa.
One of these is the "Safe Motherhood Initiative," a project designed to lower the high rate of deaths during childbirth, especially in Africa.
Mr. Conable spent roughly a year reorganizing the bank so that project experts and country experts would work more closely.
"We have had a pretty good year," he says.
"We had a 100% support of our budget .
And, he adds, "I have changed a lot of emphasis in our programs."
Maybe Conable genuinely agrees with Baker, in which case he should be lumped in with Baker for criticism.
Mr. Conable insists that even though he backs the Baker debt strategy, he and the Treasury secretary "have had strategic disagreements. "
Bank staffers cite a loan to Chile last year over U.S. opposition.
But the new money is being swamped by interest payments, and commercial banks are putting up little new money of their own.
In 1986, the 17 nations paid back lenders $18 billion more than they got in new loans.
"We are not there to try and handle their short-term debt problems, and if you think we are, then I think you misunderstand the nature of this institution," he says.
But Mr. Conable's own nature still isn't clear, Rep. LaFalce argues.
"He had a strong identity here in Congress, which he earned.
But he doesn't have his own identity as president of the World Bank.
He was created by Jim Baker and George Bush in this job.
