Introduction: House Speaker Tom Foley charges that most of the supportfor the term limit proposal in Washington state came from"extreme right-wing activists."
Are term limits a crusadedriven by only one party or ideology?
Democrats and blacks both gaveterm limits 71% support.
Martin Plissner, political director for CBS News, sayshe has "never seen an issue on which there was so littledemographic variation.
"One reason is that term limits would open up politics tomany people now excluded from office by career incumbents.
These include blacks, other minorities, and women.
Most ofthe authors of Washington state's term limit are liberalDemocrats who want to break up "the old-boy network."
FormerRep.
Shirley Chisholm, who in 1972 was the first black to runfor a majorparty presidential nomination, says "longtermincumbency is a big reason that Congress no longer works andisn't representative.
ColoradoRep.
Term limits for Congress have been supported by some ofhistory's most prominent Democrats.
Harry Truman and John F.Kennedy both endorsed the idea while they were president.
Term limits are a castor oil that democracy needs totake," he says.
Last year, as head of the CaliforniaDemocratic Party he refused to sign a party slate maileragainst term limits.
It'stime more candidates thought of politics as a calling insteadof a career."Mr.
Brown says arguments that legislative staff and theunelected bureaucracy would gain power under term limits aresimply proof that "we must curb the excessive power of thosepolitical players as well."
"The systemneeds a kick in the rear," says Mr. Lamm.
"While many prominent Democrats support term limits, party"apparatchiks" are dead set against them.
The DemocraticCongressional Campaign Committee has quietly put out the wordthat it will blacklist political consultants who advisecandidates to back term limits and has told pollsters not toask term-limit questions.
Intimidation like that has slowed support for term limitsamong Democratic officeholders, but there are exceptions.
InMassachusetts, the state's Democratic attorney general andsecretary of state both favor term limits.
In Texas, Gov.
Journalists are under fewer constraints than electedofficials in expressing enthusiasm for term limits.
Amongthose who have, and who will never be accused of beingcard-carrying Republicans, are: Washington Post columnistRichard Cohen, syndicated columnist Richard Reeves, theNational Journal's Neal Peirce and Time magazine's MichaelKramer.
The liberal Seattle Times,Washington state's largest newspaper, stunned its readers byendorsing term limits.
Last month,the station made a highly unusual about-face and endorsedterm limits for Congress: "We're not going to get{leadership} till we have a massive infusion of new blood.
"Among Democratic Party activists, James Calaway of Texasis typical of those who now favor term limits.
He says termlimits would mean "we're governed by citizens who go homeafter their service and not permanent, elitist people whonever leave office."
Indeed, the Democratic Party couldactually be helped by term limits, according to formerOklahoma state legislator Cleta Mitchell, a self-described"liberal feminist" who works with the Denver-based term limitgroup Americans Back in Charge.
