He and the others who dwelt on thispoint also don't read the Second Amendment very well.
Thesubject is not just the militia but "a well-regulatedmilitia," people trained, disciplined and armed for defenseof the community under commanding officers.
That same correspondent accused me of calling for "removalof all guns from American citizens through the implementationof total regulations. "
I said thatalthough the Second Amendment has nothing to do with privateuses of arms , there is an unenumerated but undeniable rightto own a gun.
We have many rights not enumerated in the Constitution,such as the right to marry, drive a car or own a dog.
All the letters missed entirely my point about requiringgun owners to "sign up" with (not "join") the National Guard.
I likened it to the current law requiring 18-year-old men toregister with the Selective Service.
Requiring gunowners to register with the National Guard would provide thekind of scrutiny the Brady and Staggers bills contemplated,and, if Congress dared, could provide an additional measureof control over who owns what kinds of weapons.
But my main point was to show how far Congress can go ingun-control legislation without exceeding its constitutionalpowers, using as a model the legislation of the SecondCongress, which included most of the authors of the SecondAmendment.
Another letter writer thinks I have confused the issue bycalling the duty to serve in the militia a right to serve,but if he will look at the debates in the First Congress hewill see that there is no confusion at all, that the authorsof the Second Amendment were talking about the right toserve.
Elbridge Gerry opposed James Madison'sclause exempting persons "religiously scrupulous," because ofthe danger that it might be abused to discriminate againstmembers of certain sects, "to declare who are those who arereligiously scrupulous," and then keep them out of themilitia.
And since the proliferation ofguns in the hands of criminals has become a nationalcalamity, as police officials all over the nation attest, itis essential that we recapture the true purpose of the SecondAmendment.
