The real surprise isthat some strong supporters of free markets, such as The WallStreet Journal, have been the biggest advocates of termlimits.
This argument is similar tothe Galbraith-like view that big corporations with massiveadvertising budgets can consistently dupe their customersinto buying inferior products.
Another argument is that a citizen Congress with itscontinuing flow of fresh faces into Washington would resultin better government than that provided by representativeswith lengthy tenure.
The counter-argument is that experienceis an important characteristic for legislators.
Eachviewpoint has some validity.
Presumably the best solution isto let the market decide, that is, to allow the electorate todetermine the proper balance between freshness andexperience.
But if the electoral control process isworking, so that officeholders conform with the interests ofthe majority of their constituents, then the electoraterewards its representatives with re-election.
If the publicvoted against satisfactory performers just to install a newface, then officeholders would have less incentive to behaveand the system would work badly.
The threat not to re-elect works only if the incumbent isinterested in another term, whether for his current or foranother office.
Much has been made of Alexander Hamilton'sreflections on this point in Federalist 72: "One ill effectof the exclusion {from re-election} would be a diminution ofthe inducements to good behavior."
)The only respectable argument in favor of term limits thatI know of refers to the legislature and involves theinteraction with the seniority system.
Even if seniority is a net cost in the aggregate, however,each district has an incentive to re-elect its own incumbent(and would if possible vote against the incumbents from otherdistricts) because the representative's relative senioritytranslates into a large share of governmental largess.
As an example, the votersof Washington state recently rejected a proposal that wouldhave limited the seniority of their congressionalrepresentatives relative to those of other states.
Yet thesame voters likely would have approved a proposal thatlimited the terms of all Congressional representatives, notjust those from Washington.
Changes in the seniority system may therefore be asuperior alternative to term limits.
If a representative'spower to favor his or her district did not vary withseniority, then voters would not have an excessive incentiveto re-elect incumbents.
The seniority system could be changedonly by getting Congress to alter its own rules (as it has attimes in the past) or else by constitutional amendment, whichwould, from a practical standpoint, also have to initiate inCongress.
It does not seem tomatter much -- it may even be detrimental -- if the contentof a Civil Rights Act actually has something to do with civilrights.
The formal system of seniorityis also only a part of the story; members' increasingfamiliarity with interest groups is a kind of seniority thatwould not be eliminated by changes in the rules for committeeassignments, staffing and so on.
Of course, since the passage of the 22nd Amendment in1951, there is a two-term limit on the presidency, and 29 ofthe 50 states have some kind of term limit on the governor.
)The origins of these limits may have more to do withcompetition between legislative and executive branches thanwith a desire to improve public policy.
Perhaps the best test of executive term limits is to checkwhether the states with term limits on the governor haveperformed better or worse than those without such limits.
Theanswer, if one holds constant geographical region and thelevel of per capita income in 1960, is that states with termlimits experienced slightly below average growth ofper-capita income over the last 30 years but were also alittle below average in the fraction of state product thatwent to state and local government expenditures.
Notsurprisingly, the main message is that executive term limitsare not an important determinant of economic growth or statespending.
Executive term limits are therefore a bad idea, but oneshould not expect vastly better performance at the state ornational level from the elimination of these restrictions.
Legislative term limits are less clear-cut and it is possibleto build a respectable case that favors such limits.
