Introduction:LOS ANGELES -- A much-awaited report that paints adistressing picture of brutality and racism in the LosAngeles Police Department, and that calls for the resignationof its chief, could prompt changes in law enforcementnationwide.
The report was issued yesterday by a commission appointedby Mayor Tom Bradley and Police Chief Daryl Gates in the wakeof the videotaped beating March 3 of a black motorist, RodneyKing, by Los Angeles police.
But the chief, who has remained steadfast through repeatedcalls from community leaders for his ouster, said later: "Idon't expect to just run away" from the job.
Officers commonly typed racial epithets to one another ontheir patrol car computer systems, such as: "Sounds likemonkey slapping time" and "I almost got me a Mexican lastnight."
Yet supervisors made no effort to monitor or controlthese messages, evidence of a "significant breakdown in thedepartment's management responsibility," the report found.
The Los Angeles Police Department has long been emulatedby others around the country because of its reputation forbeing efficient and corruption-free.
But the commissioncalled for a shift away from the force's paramilitaristic,us-against-them style, and said the department must embracethe "community-based" policing style that encourages officersto spend less time in their cars and more time interactingwith citizens in the communities they serve.
"This report will be a must-read for police chiefs aroundthe country," said Hubert Williams, executive director of thePolice Foundation, a Washington, D.C., law enforcementresearch group.
"The word is clear: the public expects highquality law enforcement within the parameters of the law."Mr.
"As troubling as some of our findings are .
Among the commission's recommendations are:-- A commission appointed by the mayor that oversees thedepartment should be reorganized and strengthened, and maderesponsible for handling citizen complaints.
-- A "major overhaul" of the police disciplinary systemand the process used by citizens to file complaints againstLAPD officers, especially in excessive force cases, isneeded.
However, the commission didn't address how Los Angeleswould pay for this major overhaul, though Mr. Christophersaid that "when you see the costs of settlementsaccelerating" in police misconduct lawsuits as they have inrecent years, "I'm not sure there will be a net cost"increase to implement the changes.
But with the city still sharply divided over the future ofChief Gates, and a general feeling that taxes are high enoughalready, it's questionable whether there will be a populargroundswell to immediately fund changes.
Over the years, thecity council and the mayor have been reluctant to even addadditional officers to the LAPD.
Of the six largest policedepartments in the U.S., the nation's second largest city hasthe fewest officers per thousand residents.
"The commission's recommendations will now be reviewed bythe City Council, which will weigh whether to adopt them inwhole or in part.
Ultimately, voters must decide severalissues, including whether to set term limits on the chief'stenure.
The commission intends to reconvene in six months toassess the progress.
The harsh tone of the report was welcome vindication forcommunity leaders who have claimed that police brutality iswidespread.
"Any fair reading of the reportconstitutes an `F' for {Chief Gates's} job performance.
Mayor Bradley said he hopes that Chief Gates's will"follow the commission's recommendations" to "commence thetransition to a new chief of police."
The mayor, whoappointed Gates but lacks the authority to fire him, haspreviously called for Chief Gates's resignation.
