Introduction: It's a coincidence of cosmic proportions.
But the sun also happens to be about 400 times as far away from Earth asthe moon.
And when the moon's orbit happens to carry it directly across the faceof the sun, as it will Thursday, the effect is stunning -- a total solareclipse.
"It's maybe the greatest natural occurrence one can witness," said LarryToy, a Chabot College astronomy professor. "
The phenomenon is justawe-inspiring.
"Solar eclipses occur twice a year, when the sun, moon andearth line up.
(This line-up would occur at every new moon, except that themoon's orbit is tilted so it only crosses the sun's path every six months.
In these cases the moon's shadow, up to 200 mileswide on the earth's surface, races west to east along the ground at 1,000 to5,000 miles per hour for a few thousand miles.
They occur over water, over the poles or indifficult-to-reach terrain.
In the United States, the opportunity has come twice in the past couple ofdecades -- along the East Coast in 1970 and across the Northwest and NorthernPlains in 1979.This Thursday the moon's shadow will be back for anotherperformance, one of the century's best.
It's unusual for several reasons.
"It's goingto be great from up there on the mountain," said Harold Zirin, a CaliforniaInstitute of Technology astronomer who will be at one of the observatoriesatop Mauna Kea, a dormant volcano that makes up a large piece of the island ofHawaii.
And in1919, astronomers spotted a star, which should have been behind the sun,instead peeking around the edge of the sun.
But this time, theeclipse is coming to them, and they can't resist a look.
The air above it is still, dry andclean, making it one of the world's choicest spots for viewing the cosmos.
It's so high that oxygen deprivation is a serious concern.
(The KeckObservatory, being built by the University of California and the CaliforniaInstitute of Technology, is behind its original construction schedule and willnot be completed in time for the eclipse.
They hope the information willprovide clues to what causes the sun's 11-year cycle of sunspots and flares(now near its peak), what propels the solar wind and why the sun's outeratmosphere is, paradoxically, so much hotter than its lower atmosphere.
"Thebiggest problem," Zirin said, "is whether we're going to see the eclipse."
