Addressing President Virgilio Barco, the El Tiempo editorialsaid: ``In your hands, and only in your hands, is the power toavoid the country's dissolution.''
``The gravest aspect of Colombia's bloodletting is that thegovernment has no idea how to even slow it,'' said a member of aregional human rights committee based in Medellin, the cocainecapital.
He declined to be identified because he was afraid someone mightbe angered by his statements and kill him.
Four of his predecessorshave been assassinated.
In recent interviews, Pizarro, the candidate for the leftistApril 19 Movement, or M-19, admitted he was afraid.
But he said hisdesire to lead Colombia was greater than his fear of assassins'bullets.
A gunman on a suicide mission shot Pizarro aboard a Colombianjetliner after it took off from Bogota's airport.
Two other presidential candidates had already been assassinatedduring the campaign for May 27 elections.
The media, citing security sources, reported that traffickerswere the main suspects in Pizarro's killing as well.
Former president Alfonso Lopez said the assassinations of threecandidates indicated that Colombia's armed forces must bereorganized.
Lopez, of the Liberal Party, was president from 1974 to 1978.
Official investigations have shown that certain members of thearmed forces are allied with drug traffickers and the country'sright-wing death squads.
One of the country's presidential candidates, Alvaro Gomez, saidFriday that Barco should name a three-man council to run Colombia'ssecurity forces to avoid a military coup.
Gomez made the proposal in a written statement given to the press.
``Never has there been such a great and pathetic image ofanarchy,'' said Gomez, a presidential candidate of the ConservativeParty.
The unit achieved its greatest success against drug traffickerswhen it killed a Medellin cartel leader, Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha,in a gunfight last December.
Through such reforms they hope to reform the corrupted Congress,strengthen the judicial system and provide more politicalrepresentation for minority parties.
