America was founded on aphilosophy of individual rights, not group rights.
The civilrights movement was at its greatest when it proclaimed thehighest principles on which this country was founded --principles such as the Declaration of Independence which werebetrayed in the case of blacks and other minorities."
-- "I believe that society is now in a position tovigorously enforce equal rights for all Americans.
We are not beggars or objects of charity.
We don't getsmarter just because we sit next to white people in class,and we don't progress just because society is ready withhandouts.
"While the views of President Bush's first Supreme Courtnominee, David Souter, were virtually unknown before hisconfirmation, the 43-year-old Mr. Thomas has boldlyarticulated his vision of constitutional law, both as a judge-- he now sits on the Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia Circuit, the nation's second-highest bench -- and,before that, as chairman of the Equal Employment OpportunityCommission for eight years.
"Basically the job of a judge is to figure out what thelaw says, not what he wants it to say," Mr. Thomas told me.
{Judge Robert} Bork was right about that,no question.
Judging requires a certain impartiality.
This isn't law school speculation.
When I heara case, I know damn well that something is going to happen asa result of what I decide.
And these arepeople looking to me, to the judge, to figure out what'sjust, to correctly apply the law.
That's not a responsibilityI take lightly.
Circuit, as evidence thatMr.
But infact, a careful reading of his articles and speeches revealsa different sort of judicial conservatism.
Writing in the Howard Law Journal in 1987, Mr. Thomasargued for what he called a "natural law" or "higher law"mode of judging, in which the judge examines not only thetext of the Constitution or statute but also the moralprinciples underlying the American form of government.
Part of King's legacy, for Mr. Thomas,is his reflection on the close connection between law andmorality.
When youget up there, you just hope that you don't get destroyed sothat even if you don't make it, you can go on with yourlife."Mr.
Thomas is likely to be a very different kind of judgefrom the man he is replacing.
Abraham Lincoln oncesaid that the American founders declared the right ofequality whose enforcement would follow as soon ascircumstances permitted.
I believe inthe American proposition, the American dream, because I'veseen it in my own life."Mr.
Thomas's life is a remarkable story.
The family shared a single outhouse with several neighbors.
In the summer of 1955, Clarence Thomas and his brotherwent to live with their maternal grandparents, who owned anice delivery and fuel oil business.
Mygrandfather has been the greatest single influence on mylife," he claims.
In 1987 he told the Atlantic, "When thecivil rights people indict me, the man they are indicting isthat man.
"As Mr. Thomas remembers, his grandfather believed that"Man ain't got no business on relief as long as he can work.
Damn welfare, that relief]" At home the Thomas boys workedsix hours a day in addition to school: raising the chickens,pigs and cows; cleaning the house and the yard; painting,roofing, plumbing and fixing; maintaining the oil trucks andmaking deliveries.
These lessons of hard work, personal dignity andself-sufficiency were reinforced through years of Catholicschool and college.
"In 1971 he founded the Black Student Union at Holy Cross.
"Nevertheless, "I never gave up my grandfather's ideals,and when my left-wing opinions began to clash with thoseideals, I began to move away from the left."
"At a conference of black conservatives in San Francisco,Calif., Mr. Thomas's eloquent departures from the civilrights orthodoxy on quotas and government handouts greatlyimpressed the newly installed Reagan administration, and in1981 he was nominated to be assistant secretary for civilrights in the Department of Education.
Thomas came in, andhe rejected all that," remarks William Robinson, dean of theDistrict of Columbia School of Law.
Mr. Thomas had his skirmishes with the LeadershipConference on Civil Rights, an umbrella group instrumental indefeating the Bork nomination, and he made a dangerous enemyin the American Association of Retired Persons, which accusedhim of letting legal protections for the elderly lapse.
Whenhe was nominated to the D.C.
But the storm clouds melted away and Mr. Thomas was approvedby the Senate Judiciary with a 12-1 majority.
Thomas.
"If I or a member of my family were in trouble, he is thekind of person I'd like to appear before," Judge Damon Keith,a Carter appointee on the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals inDetroit said in an interview.
"Our judicial philosophy maynot be the same, but he is a bright and reflective man whobelieves passionately in fairness.
I say this withoutreservation, and in full knowledge of all the people whocomplain about him.
"The problemfor my opponents, and for my friends, is that I don't think Ifit any of these molds very well.
