Introduction: How much more of an "investment" should American taxpayers make in the welfare system?
This is the question the House of Representatives is scheduled to take up today when it votes on the Family Welfare Reform Act of 1987.
The bill proposes $5.2 billion in new spending over five years, and most of that will increase benefits currently received by welfare recipients.
This thinking was nicely summarized by Rep. Anthony Beilenson, who said plainly, "The truth is, for welfare reform to be successful, it's got to be expensive."
That conclusion was presumably the basis for the bipartisan consensus that was going to produce a serious welfare-reform bill this year.
The bulk of the new money would go to higher AFDC pay-outs, extension of mandatory benefits to two-parent families and maintenance of certain benefits for welfare recipients earning some income.
In short, the Family Welfare Reform Act amounts to an expanded investment in the status quo.
That might produce reprisals from voters who've watched their tax dollars build and maintain the welfare system, with little evident return on their investment.
In fact, while the level of AFDC benefits has decreased in real terms since 1970, the total level of all welfare benefits has not.
Nearly all AFDC families also receive Medicaid coverage, for instance; more than three-quarters receive food stamps, and one-third have children who receive free school meals.
One-quarter receive housing assistance.
The House Democrats' claim that welfare recipients are worse off than they were in 1970 -- in terms of the level of benefits received -- is dubious.
Measured in the terms that really count -- namely the number of welfare dependents liberated from the rolls -- the situation has become worse.
It is difficult to accept that the $4.3 billion increase in basic benefits proposed in the Family Welfare Reform Act will do much of anything about the problem of hard-core welfare dependency.
The House bill doesn't do that.
By adding several welfare programs to what already exists (without eliminating any), the House bill adds another layer to an already complex welfare system.
By further increasing rather than gradually reducing the level of benefits available to recipients, it makes welfare more, not less, enticing.
Democrats and Republicans alike agreed on the need for change.
