Introduction:LIMA -- On June 4, I was among a group of journalists whowere told that the war against the Shining Path ("SenderoLuminoso") guerrillas had almost been won.
Lucky punchessometimes win wars, and maybe this was the case.
Among Shining Path watchers("Senderlogos") there is strong disagreement on fundamentals:Is the Shining Path getting stronger or weaker?
And finally,who is actually winning the war?
There are no easy answers.
Its first actions were cautious, modest andoften ludicrous in a crazy way (like hanging dogs fromlampposts, with scribbled insults over them to ChineseCommunist martyrs).
Now about 50% of all Peruvians live under emergency law.
In10 years, the war between the Shining Path and the governmenthas cost about 20,000 lives.
Mr. Belaunde (the first to deal withthe problem), who tried to ignore the insurgency out ofexistence, is regarded as a well-meaning but inept leader.
There are no kind words for Mr. Garcia, on the other hand.
In the first weeks of his mandate, he made several rightmoves -- like emphasizing his role as commander in chief ofthe armed forces and reorganizing the corruption-riddenpolice.
But things began to unravel soon after.
At first, hetried a liberal approach, looking for a dialogue with thefanatical Shining Path, and sending scores of youngprofessionals to the emergency areas to attack what he saidwere the "root causes" of the insurgency.
But dialogue wasdisdainfully rejected: Dozens of these professionals wereassassinated, and the armed forces slowed down their actions,while the rebels made largely unimpeded progress.
Not even in that was Mr. Garcia successful, as violenceclimbed steadily during the second half of his term.
In 1988,1,986 people were killed as a result of insurgent orcounterinsurgent actions; in 1989, 3,198 were killed; and1,730 during the first six months of 1990.How well is Mr. Fujimori expected to deal with theinsurgency?
"{Themilitary} should mainly provide security for developmentprojects," Mr. Loayza says.
He alsofeels that the Shining Path is weakened, and that animportant Shining Path faction would be willing to engage inpeace talks.
This is only wishful thinking, according to Mr. Merino:"If President Fujimori thinks he'll finish the war throughthose `pacification' policies, it will be like riding intobattle with no better dress or weapons than a tuxedo.
"Actually, Mr. Fujimori might end up implementing internalwar policies that would be quite different from thoseadvocated during his campaign.
Free-market economist Hernandode Soto, who has been advising Mr. Fujimori during the pastmonth, thinks that might be the case. "
Running against all majortrends of contemporary history, the insurgents have followedShining Path founder Abimael Guzman with the commitment thatthe faithful reserve for their prophet.
This was evident whenwalking through their safe house in Lima.
It looked, said aPeruvian journalist, like the seed for the future "Museum ofthe Revolution" -- wood carvings; woven baskets; tapestries;paintings; chiseled stone; all meticulously, lovingly craftedwith the mythified motifs of the internal war.
There werealso the hagiographic representations of Mr. Guzman himself,in the various postures that endeavored to combine the heroicwith the intellectual.
