Introduction: Most Southern Californians would agree that hills and canyons are among the most desirable places to live.
While little can be done to control the natural fires that occur in chaparral country, homeowners can change their approach to landscaping and help improve the chances of their homes and property surviving a brush fire.
"The idea behind fire-resistant landscaping -- firescaping -- is to design landscaping to minimize the fire hazard," says Owen Dell, a Santa Barbara landscape contractor who has many canyon and hillside homeowners as clients.
Dell became interested in the concept after the 1977 Sycamore Canyon fire in which 200 homes were lost and only a shift in the wind prevented the loss of additional Santa Barbara residences.
Many of my clients lost property, but the fire jumped from house to house, then skipped others.
Dell, the Santa Barbara City Fire Department, the city government and a number of volunteers combined their efforts and began planning the Santa Barbara Firescapes Demonstration Garden to educate the public about reducing the risks of wildfire near their homes.
The garden is landscaped into four plant zones, with the most flammable vegetation planted farthest from the house.
Zone 4, farthest from the house, consists of native vegetation that has been thinned to reduce the amount of fuel that could feed a fire.
Zone 2 features highly fire-retardant succulents.
It's designed to be a greenbelt zone of maximum fire protection.
Jade, aloe vera, phormium and evergreen currant are among the high-moisture-content plants characteristic of this zone.
Some trees and plants are surprisingly hazardous. "
Those eucalyptus trees," Dell says.
And the Monterey pine -- it's so full of volatile oils, it's almost unbelievable. "
One popular plant found almost everywhere in Southern California -- ice plant -- would seem to be an ideal choice for a firescape garden.
Actually, it can be a menace.
The plant produces a great deal of litter beneath that succulent surface and can smolder for days.
Two other surprisingly flammable flora are redwood trees and bougainvillea.
Dell thinks several successive drought years have finally persuaded Southern Californians to rethink approaches to gardening.
Suddenly, xeriscaping -- landscaping with drought-tolerant natives -- is becoming commonplace and fashionable.
The Firescapes Demonstration Garden is located across the street from City Fire Station 7 at 2411 Stanwood Drive and is open every day from 8 a.m. until sunset.
Turn left and continue to the fire station, on your left, just opposite the garden.
