Introduction:   America's 1988 drought captured attentioneverywhere, but especially in Washington where politicians pushedthrough the largest disaster relief measure in U.S. history.
TheAssociated Press went back to track where the $3.9 billion went andfound the money spread far beyond the drought.
At each step, the program was broadened.
Congress began with abill to aid drought victims.
Nothing in federal procedures,however, requires paperwork to be forwarded to higher officials forroutine approval or checking.
By the end of this October, about one-quarter of all U.S.farmers had collected on damage to most of 506 eligible crops andjust about any kind of weather peril in 49 states.
The taxpayers'tab ran to $3.9 billion.
``We lucked out last year on account of the boys up north,''said Travis Turnipseed, a Levelland, Texas, cotton farmer who's hadhail damage 23 out of the last 28 years, but collected cash for thefirst time in 1988.
The politics of 1988 and the media attention the droughtreceived _ a steady bombardment of print and electronic images ofshriveled cornstalks and cracked, dusty fields _ played key rolesin rushing through the nation's largest ever disaster reliefmeasure.
``Being an election year, there were a lot of concessions tofarmers,'' said Dan Otto, a professor at Iowa State University.``(The politicians) were trying to get recognized as a friend ofagriculture.''
In the end, drought relief became a one-time bonus for thousandsof farmers in parts of the country that in 1988 generally enjoyedgood crops at higher prices and wouldn't have qualified as disasterareas, including parts of California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas,Oklahoma, Maryland and New Jersey.
``It was there, so I took it,'' said Melvin Przilas, a wheat andcorn farmer in the Texas Panhandle who collected $2,254 becausehail and Russian wheat aphids damaged his 1,265-acre irrigatedfarm, which grosses $300,000 to $400,000 a year.
Government officials say they did the best they could with arushed program.
Loopholes were tightened in 1989's smaller $1billion drought relief program.
``What percentage, we don't know.
Butthat is part of the beast I guess that was created.
The AP found some farmers who did better than just luck out.
Those growers profited by ``triple-dipping'': reaping cropinsurance as well as drought aid on damaged crops, then replantingthe same ground for a successful harvest _ all perfectly legalunder the 1988 program.
In several cases, corporations ineligible for drought reliefbecause of the bill's $2 million cutoff on gross annual incomecollected anyway because they owned a stake in a farm.
Pryslak Farms of Great Meadows, N.J., a $9 million-a-yearproduce, garden and truck farming operation, collected $100,000 forlosses on endive, escarole and leaf lettuce because the localAgriculture Department official said he thought the $2 millionceiling applied to just the vegetable operation.
Wrong, say Washington officials _ the ceiling applies to revenuefrom all operations.
In North Dakota, the hardest-hit state, farmers lost anestimated $1.1 billion to the drought, but direct federal aid cutthat by 36 percent, to $706 million.
Without that money, ``it would have meant substantially morelosses to Main Street,'' Cochran said.
``Drought legislation savedbusinesses from having to close their doors.''
To examine the program, the AP interviewed agriculture expertsin 21 states then chose 14 states whose rainfall data and droughtpayments were matched county by county in a computer database.
Fromthose results, the AP selected 120 counties for further study.
Farm Entitlement reports, the ASCS summaries of individualfarms' participation in the program, were requested for about12,000 farms in those counties under the Freedom of Information Act.
Because much of the ASCS paperwork never leaves the counties,reporters then traveled to 22 county offices in eight states toexamine more detailed drought program files for 346 specificfarmers, also available under the FOIA.
Because of hail damage, Gresham and his companies collected$248,662 from the drought program, plus $159,478 from federal cropinsurance.
And he gambled and replanted the lost cotton acres withmilo _ and made a good crop.
``I'll be the first to tell you it worked out to a good year forme,'' Gresham said.
