Introduction:   One of nature's most vicious spectacles, thetornado, is poised to renew its annual assault on America, aschangeable spring weather breeds the storms that spawn twisters.
Last year was one of fewer than normal tornado deaths, but evenso, more than 700 of the violent funnel clouds struck the nation.
In 1988 the nation recorded 32 tornado deaths, down from the 59killed a year earlier and well below the long-term average of 99fatalities annually, the National Weather Service reported on Sunday.
``There is no way of knowing what this tornado season will bring,but the way to survive is through preparedness,'' said Ed Ferguson,deputy director of the National Severe Storms Forecast Center inKansas City.
Meteorologists have attributed the decline in tornado deaths inrecent years to increased public awareness of the storms, which aremost common in May and June but can occur in any month of the year.
Unusually warm and wet weather last November helped trigger arecord number of tornadoes for that month, at 121 across thecountry.
The average for November is only 23 tornadoes, and therecord had been 81, set in 1973.
Last year also recorded the largest tornado outbreak in 14 years.
That took place on Mother's Day when 57 twisters tore through partsof Arkansas, Illinois, Iowa and Wisconsin.
Four peoplewere killed in North Carolina and two each in Mississippi andNebraska.
States with a single fatality apiece were Kentucky,Michigan, Missouri, New York, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas.
After a low point in the winter they begin to increase sharply inMarch and peak in May with a national average of 166 twisters inthat month, according to records kept at the National Climatic DataCenter.
Tornadoes are least likely during the early morning justbefore sunrise.
But while an individual twister can cover only a small area, theyoften come in groups and in the affected area destruction can betotal.
The familiar funnel cloud is the most common sign of a tornadoalthough adjacent winds can also cause severe damage.
When twisters are in an area, common sense and knowing a fewsimple rules can save lives, the National Weather Service says.
If atwister is reported, safety rules include:   _ At home, seek shelter immediately in a basement or interiorhallway.
Stay away from windows and outside walls.
Head for asecure shelter or lie flat on the ground.
_ At work or in public buildings, head for interior hallways onthe lowest floor, or designated shelter areas.
