Much Unscathed Despite infernos that whipped through the treetops like blast furnaces, most of the pristine landscape emerged unscathed, as did the elusive grizzly bears in the high country, the resilient herds of elk and bison and the famous geysers that fill the air with eerie puffs of steam and mist.
But cut into the green are huge gashes of once-thriving forest that now appear either pitch black or rusty brown, depending on whether the trees were roasted or merely singed.
Either way, they're dead.
Down at ground level, the same scenery is a thing of beauty, not devastation, to the eyes of soil scientist Henry Shovic.
He turns a spade of blackened earth and finds rich brown soil just beneath the crust, a sign that the forest not only remains fertile but will soon be teeming with new life.
"Did you see the green?"
I'm amazed.
It is sure to leave its mark on future fire and management policies not just at Yellowstone but throughout the vast system of national parks and wilderness areas.
"It was a hell of a summer, let me tell you," said Yellowstone Supt.
Bob Barbee.
On the one hand, they are supposed to be preserves of the past, the last outposts in America where nature is allowed to take its course with as little intrusion as possible from man.
On the other hand, they are also set aside as vacation and tourist havens for the taxpayers, who, after all, pay the bills.
If nothing else, said James Agee, a forest ecology specialist at the University of Washington, the furor raised by the fires should force environmentalists to temper their purist approach to park management.
Ecologists argue that wildfires clear away dead timber and overgrowth and are vital to the rejuvenation of forests.
Tied to Neighbors But "parks can no longer be considered ecological and sociological islands," Agee told a conference of conservationists here over the weekend.
"They are inextricably tied to their neighbors for better or worse."
The Interior Department, parent of the National Park Service, has already ordered a summer-long moratorium on its politically sensitive "let-burn" policy, under which lightning-triggered blazes are allowed to burn unless they threaten human lives or property.
With the exception of Big Cypress and the Everglades, we will be in full suppression mode," a park service spokesman explained.
May Become Gun-Shy Michael Scott, regional director of the Wilderness Society, said restrictions could lead to a "systematic politicization of ecosystem management" and make officials gun-shy about letting fire burn for any reason.
"They're going to say 'we better just put out the fires,' " Scott predicted.
From an ecologist's standpoint, the "let-burn" policy could be the most serious casualty of last year's blazes, which swelled to historic proportions and ultimately seared nearly 1 million of the park's 2.2 million acres.
And some of last year's most destructive blazes were triggered by man, not nature, and fought from the first sign of smoke.
"What is most humbling is that one-quarter inch of rain and snow on Sept. 11 essentially stopped what the greatest firefighting effort in history could not," argued John Varley, Yellowstone's chief scientist.
They say the park did too little, too late and let the fires get out of hand.
All that stuff about burning's good for growth is a crock.
I'll never see any of it in my lifetime."
Will Keep Job While many critics have called for Barbee's head, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. said in an interview that the Yellowstone superintendent was in no danger of losing his job.
Still, Lujan, a former New Mexico congressman appointed to his Cabinet post only this year, said park officials should have "admitted" that they erred in losing control of the blazes.
This year, only one of the rooms has been taken so far.
There are conflicting signals over what impact the fires have had on the tourist trade.
Other independent innkeepers, as well as lodges in the park, also report that reservations are soft.
However, Marsha Karle, a spokeswoman for the park, said letters and calls logged by Yellowstone operators are about double their usual pace and the number of visitors entering the park so far this spring has been well above normal.
The park has embarked on an unprecedented publicity drive as well as an $8.5-million rehabilitation project to reassure reluctant tourists that it has not been transformed into a bleak wasteland.
We have the rare opportunity to witness wildlife regeneration on a scale rarely seen anywhere on Earth."
Interpretive programs will feature talks on fire and its effects and there are even tentative plans to develop a children's trail through a fire-damaged area to explain the phenomenon to youngsters.
Expect Many Scientists While the response from tourists is still questionable, the park is bracing for an unprecedented onslaught of scientists looking into everything from fire behavior patterns to its effects on grizzly bears, fisheries, grasslands and the nesting status of bald eagles.
"It's like a big laboratory."
Even local merchants, suppressing any anguish over the fire and its ultimate impact, are jumping on the bandwagon.
Yellowstone officials are making no apologies for their handling of the fires, which they contend was not only ecologically sound but also in concert with then existing park service regulations.
Circling the wagons against critics, they insist that the uncertainty and furor raised by what happened here resulted largely from media accounts that sometimes wildly exaggerated the extent of the blazes and their impact.
"There was no ecological downside to the fires," Barbee said recently. "
They outdid themselves with hyperbole."
Lujan's reservations aside, an internal government review has largely backed up the approach taken by Barbee and other park officials in dealing with the fires.
Natural, Beneficial Another major post-fire study, this one conducted by a panel of experts from several major universities, has yet to be released.
However, the chairman of the panel, Duke University botanist Norman L. Christensen, told a congressional hearing last January that he considered the fires to be both natural and beneficial to the Yellowstone environment. "
Ecologists are in total agreement that wildfires were a natural part of the primeval North American landscape," Christensen testified. "
Although less frequent, fires approaching the size of those in 1988 occurred in the 1700s and probably occurred at 200- to 300- year intervals through the Western mountains over the past 10,000 years."
Christensen said that there is ample evidence that such fires kill few animals and ultimately improve their habitat by promoting the growth of plants and shrubs that could not thrive in the gloom of a thick forest.
Here is how reforestation process takes place after logging or a fire: Stage 1- Lodgepole pine saplings grow in stands before forming canopy (up to 40 years after a fire).
Stage 2- Closed canopy of even-aged, usually dense young trees (40 to 100 years).
Stage 3- Lodgepole pines dominate, canopy largely intact.
Some spruce and fir below (100 to 300 years.
Stage 5- Canopy, dominated by over-mature lodgepole pines, beginning to break up (over 300 years).
Yellowstone National Park 
