Introduction:Of all the extravagant plans inspired by this week's solar eclipse, none beatsthe Earth Evacuation Project.
While Angel and his followers meditate to prepare for their journey, FrenchNew Age musician Jean-Michel Jarre is coordinating an elaboratesound-and-light show to play at the foot of the pyramids in Teotihuacan, northof the capital.
Also on E-day, July 11, crowded cruise ships will lingeroff Mexico's Pacific Coast, and thousands of U.S. tourists will drive southinto Baja California, which, usually boasting clear skies, is being billed asthe world's most promising site from which to view nature's own light show.
However, the chic hotspot for eclipse watchers won't be Mexico, but the big island of Hawaii, wherethe 18,000 tourists who would be there anyway to enjoy the sunshine will bejoined by an additional 30,000 or more coming to watch the sun go out for fourminutes.
Even more people might be there for the show, but for the lack ofseats on flights to the island.
Most visitors will be funneled in through therelatively small airport at Kailua.
Airlines are adding scores of flightsto ferry thousands of people from neighboring islands in the hours just beforethe eclipse.
Car rental companies have shipped in 3,000 or so extra cars.
More than one caller from the mainland has asked the visitors' bureauwhether the island is in danger of tipping over under the tourists' weight.
The midday eclipse will consist of a 160-mile wide lunar shadowspeeding at up to 5,000 miles per hour along the Earth's surface.
Whilemany Mexicans are looking forward to the event, some are quietly takingprecautions.
In pre-Colombian times, eclipses were viewed as bad omens by thesun-worshiping Aztecs.
In the capital's Sonora market, specializing inmagic, vendors have stocked up on garlic bulbs tied with red ribbon, whichthey hawk as protection from "the bad vibrations of the eclipse. "
"We're worried that Californians will drive down on the spur of the moment,without taking water or fuel," said Marivi Lerdo, who promotes tourism toMexico in New York.
Although Hawaii's isolation will limit the size of thecrowds, locals are still predicting problems.
"By God, there's just one roadon this island," a circle route that often narrows to two lanes, one shopowner said.
"It's going to be total insanity.
"These are people who havenever, ever, missed a single episode of 'Star Trek,' " said Ken Stewart, whois planning to lead a caravan of 50 enthusiasts from San Diego to Cabo SanLucas, on the south tip of Baja.
Mexico's government is heavily involvedin eclipse planning, having formed an Intersecretarial Commission for theEclipse, which, among other things, is supposed to oversee production of asmany as 60 million protective lenses.
Newspapers here are carrying frequentreminders not to stare directly at the sun.
At six observatories atopHawaii's Mauna Kea, a dormant volcano that is the highest peak in the Pacific,solar researchers will turn their telescopes on the sun's outer atmosphere asthe moon covers the rest of the star.
As the moon passes over the sun, there are certain powervortexes here that are going to be opened up and awakened," she said.
It's safest to watch the eclipse indirectly by projecting the sun's imagethrough a pinhole and onto a sheet of white paper.
