The firestorm that raged through here in recent weeks was driven by 60-mile-an-hour winds that fanned temperatures to more than 1,600 degrees Fahrenheit.
The fire was so intense that a gray shadow on the forest floor is all that remains of a fallen log.
Where many people recoil at the sweep of nature's destructive power, the 47-year-old Mr. Despain marvels at the tiny steps life is already taking to renew itself.
As Yellowstone National Park's research biologist, he has already begun to monitor the forest's rebirth from the worst fire on record.
The little wings act like the rotary blades of a helicopter in dispersing the seeds.
"This is amazing," says Mr. Despain, reflecting on his count.
"This works out to one million seeds an acre."
Only about 500 mature trees were on an acre of hillside here before the fire.
But next spring many of the seeds, fertilized by nutrients leaching into the soil from the snow-packed ash, will sprout, along with a bouquet of grasses, flowers and shrubs, as burnt areas of the park erupt with life.
Next year, the ground cover replacing the park's burnt stands of aging lodgepole pines should provide a 30-fold increase in plant species.
"We see what's going on here not as devastation and destruction, but, rather, rebirth and renewal of these ecosystems," says John Varley, Yellowstone's chief of research and Mr. Despain's boss.
Mr. Despain's research should play a major role in a new debate over whether to reforest burnt areas of Yellowstone or to let nature take its course.
In recent years, environmentalists have for the most part succeeded in promoting the natural processes of the parks.
The National Park Service has already been at the center of a much-publicized political firestorm over its 16-year-old "natural burn" policy, which allows lightning-caused fires to burn themselves out, except where they threaten towns or park buildings.
Reforestation would give wooded areas in Yellowstone a "five-year jump" on natural regrowth of the woods and would "get it green again," says John Davis, Willamette Industries Inc.'s general manager for Western timber logging operations in Lewiston, Idaho.
The emotional appeal of replanting the parks already has led to some reforestation proposals -- some of them a bit off the wall.
Although the offer was later amended to include native varieties, the park service politely declined.
"When I hear the word 're-vegetation,' my blood runs cold," he says.
Mr. Despain has set up or is planning several long-term research projects to study the effects of this year's fires.
In addition to his seed-counting, Mr. Despain has created nine "before and after" study plots to gauge effects of the fire.
Within these 15-by-25-meter plots, he and other researchers cataloged the size and the number of lodgepole pines, as well as the variety of plant growth on the forest floor.
(He had to abandon one such study area two weeks ago.
Fire licked at its corners even as he was mapping the trees within.)
After the fire is out, he surveys damage to a plot.
Yet only 10% to 15% of land within these boundaries was scorched by raging crown fires that burn everything in sight, Mr. Varley estimates.
In fact, nearly half the area within the fire zones remains untouched by fire.
The burnt "snags," as charred tree trunks are called, creak in the wind above Mr. Despain and are all that remain of a forest section that sprouted after a fire swept through here about the time of the Civil War.
Most of the lodgepole stands here that burned this summer were 250 to 400 years old.
Mr. Despain says it is no coincidence that most burnt trees here were senior citizens, relatively speaking, and highly susceptible to fire.
As lodgepoles age, they lose some of their natural resistance to disease and insects.
Dead trees fall to the forest floor, joined by others blown over by the strong winds howling down from surrounding peaks.
Grasses and shrubs, some of their seeds having lain dormant for 100 years or more, fill in the open spaces between the trees.
Seeds that have been dormant for decades beneath the soil appear to be triggered by the passing fire, he says, and will germinate next spring.
Meanwhile, nutrients that were bound up in the cells of mature pines for hundreds of years have been returned in the form of ash to the soil as fertilizer for next year's growth.
Carol Shively, a park ranger-naturalist at Grant Village in Yellowstone, says, "Next spring is going to be a spectacular one for wildflowers. "
For the first five years after a fire, while surrounding vegetation is still relatively low, there will be a proliferation of wildflowers in the park, she says.
In addition to fireweed and wild geraniums, lupen, yarrow, mountain dandelion and arnica have already been spotted this year among the ashes.
By next July, one will find it difficult to tell which meadows burned in 1988.
Forests visited only by ground fires will rebound almost as quickly.
Shrubs and grasses cover what is left of the burnt undergrowth, although fire scars will be visible on some trees for years.
The completely burned forests will remain a mixture of meadow and snags for several years.
But many snags, weathering to fence-post gray, will remain as monuments to the fire of 1988 for years to come.
Lodgepole pine seedlings grow as much as a foot a year in the open, although a few inches per year is more common at first.
Hundreds of plant species proliferate after a fire until "canopy closure" is achieved in about 40 years.
At that point, the pines -- still less than 15 feet tall -- begin to choke off light reaching the forest floor as their limbs grow together.
As lodgepoles come to dominate the ecosystem, other plant species decline in number, reaching a low of no more than a dozen in the mature forest.
Then the forest thins as it ages, trees fall, underbrush grows, and the forest is primed for a fire to start its life cycle over again.
Three to five additional bird species are likely to migrate into Yellowstone next year, attracted to the new plants and insects thriving in the meadows.
There has yet to be a confirmed report of a large animal killed by the flames, although a few deaths are almost inevitable, park officials say.
Yellowstone's elk and bison herds, as well as moose, should benefit from the additional forage in the park next year.
The park service is under unwelcome political pressure to feed the herds if the winter is severe.
Moving up a link in the food chain, Yellowstone's grizzly bear and mountain lion populations would be the obvious beneficiaries of an increase in winterkill among the grazing animals, according to Mr. Varley. "
So far, Mr. Mott, who didn't return calls for comment, doesn't appear in danger of losing his job, park service officials say.
But Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel says he favors certain, unspecified changes in the natural-burn policy.
Beautiful as they are, trees aren't the reason most people come to Yellowstone National Park.
A quarter moon was visible as well.
At exactly 7:24, as predicted by the sign in the window of the tourist-information office, Old Faithful sputtered once, twice and shot plumes of white steam high into the fading light.
Tourists will be back next year for this .
