The grasses will turn paper-dry byJuly, helping to spread fires quickly through trees and brush killed andweakened by five consecutive years of drought and by insects, which moreeasily invade dry wood than moist.
As of last month, live pines in the Mount Palomar area near San Diego hadless moisture than boards at a lumber yard.
Firefighting also will be madetougher this year because much of the military reserve and National Guardequipment and pilots normally mobilized against wildfires are still in thePersian Gulf and probably will be there several more months.
The area atrisk of severe fires spreads beyond California and takes in about a third ofthe United States mainland, including Oregon and Washington east of theCascades and much of Nevada, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Idaho, Montanaand the Dakotas.
But the threat is most extreme in California, where theDecember freeze added to the accumulation of dead vegetation, or fuel, asfirefighters call it.
While reluctant to predict fires because they dependnot just on drought but also on temperature and wind patterns, fire officialsare deeply worried.
"This year is shaping up to be the worst fire seasonwe've ever experienced," said Warner McGrew, assistant fire chief at SantaBarbara, where the drought is worst and where brush fires destroyed 600 homesand did $200 million damage last year.
Given the severity of the threat and lack of equipment and waterto fight fires, officials throughout the region say they plan an unusuallyaggressive approach this spring, trying to put out even the smallest wildfiresbefore they spread, and taking preventive measures such as deployingfirefighters to an area where lightning storms are forecast.
It worked inOregonThat approach helped last year in the Umatilla National Forest innortheastern Oregon, where 170 fires were reported, said Gordon Reinhart, afire and recreation officer with the U.S. Forest Service in Pendleton, Ore. One reason the fire threat is so grave in California is population growth,which has spread suburban development into wilderness areas such as thecanyons east of Malibu Beach, 25 miles from central Los Angeles, wheremillion-dollar homes sit on brushy hillsides covered with highly flammablegreasewood.
