Introduction: You think it would be utter folly to lend money to a ThirdWorld nation?
development organizations are finding that some ofthe world's poorest entrepreneurs repay their debts at ratesapproaching 100%.
This rescues them from the clutchesof loan sharks -- microloans typically charge the prevailinglocal commercial loan rate -- and lets them borrow again inhard times.
Their repayment performance shines when compared with thatof many sovereign nations.
It also looks good compared with adefault rate of 17% by U.S. recipients of federallyguaranteed student loans.
With the decline of communism, U.S. developmentgroups believe they are exporting free-market economics totiny businesses that can fuel growth in the developing world.
"Micro-enterprise lending is the hottest thing indevelopment since the Green Revolution.
TheGreen Revolution sent farm output surging in many poornations.
Ms. Romanow cites the case of Aaron Aguilar, an unemployedfactory worker in Monterrey, Mexico, who borrowed $100 to buyclay and glazes for making figurines with his wife in theirback yard.
In six years, the couple took out and repaid fiveloans and built their business to 18 full-time employees.
Sometimes borrowers have to struggle against setbacks thatmight seem comical in the prosperous West.
Undaunted, the women switched to chickens and madeenough money selling eggs to branch out into tomatoes andtailoring, ultimately opening two shops, Ms. Leet says.
Some Third World commercial banks are taking note of poorentrepreneurs' repayment rates.
Accion persuaded family-ownedMulti Credit Bank of Panama City, Panama, to start makingmicroloans two months ago.
Isaac Btesh, a director and son ofthe founder, says the bank has lent $80,000 to 100 people sofar on 60-day, rotating lines of credit -- with a 100%repayment rate.
"When we got in touch with Accion, we wereincredulous," Mr. Btesh says.
"We couldn't believe theirfigures.
But everything they said is true.
Accion, a Cambridge, Mass.-based nonprofit internationaldevelopment group and a leader in the U.S. microloanmovement, says it plans to increase its microlending thisyear to $66.5 million from $37.8 million in 1990 and $9.8million five years ago.
It says it plans to add 64,000 newclients, up from 40,000 last year and 9,000 five years ago.
Thepayback rate is 98%.CARE, New York, perhaps the world's largest privateinternational-development group, says small economic-activitydevelopment -- primarily microlending -- is itsfastest-growing portfolio.
"There's energy and creativity outthere, people bootstrapping who aren't waiting for the nexthandout," says Larry Frankel of CARE.Trickle Up, which makes thousands of $100 loans annually,says its budget rose to $1 million this year from $800,000 in1989 after doubling almost every year throughout the 1980s.
She says microlending toindividuals in 20 nations is rising sharply, with more than$3 million in circulation at the moment.
Some Third World banks, notably in Asia, have been makingmicroloans for years.
