Mounted cameras, jumpy guards and heavy doors keep out theuninvited.
The gold-colored interior is hushed and luxuriouslydecorated.
But scratch the surface of this secretive world, and the diamondbusiness loses some sparkle.
Sales have declined sharply, and the 56-year-old cartel isfacing pressure to give producers better terms and allow them tosell more of their own gems.
TheAfrican National Congress has pledged to nationalize South Africa'smajor sources of wealth if it takes power.
After growth spurts of 19 percent in 1987 and 35 percent in1988, rough diamond sales fell 2 percent to $4.09 billion last yearbecause of slowing economies, high interest rates and theorganization's two double-digit price increases in 1988 and 1989.
The decline was sharpest in the second half of the year, whensales fell 24 percent from the first six months.
``There was a very definite, noticeable slack in demand,'' saidanalyst Peter Miller of Yorkton Securities Inc. in London.
Thispast week, De Beers announced it was increasing prices 5.5 percent,compared to a 15.5 percent increase a year earlier.
Jack Lunzer, managing director of IDC Ltd., an independentdiamond distributor in London, said De Beers undoubtedly willcontinue to control the major part of world production, but itsmarketing arm's profits will fall.
Angola, whichbroke in 1985, has been negotiating its re-entry.
``We are as strongly in control of the diamond market as we havebeen for many years,'' said Tim Capon, the cartel's director.
The organization buys rough diamonds from De Beers' own mines,which represent 30 percent of world production, and from producersin Tanzania, South Africa, Zaire, Botswana, Namibia, Australia andthe Soviet Union.
It reveals few details about security.
De Beers picks its 160 or so buying customers from thousands ofhopefuls.
The buyer basically can take itor leave it.
The gems then go to cutters in the world's major diamond-cuttingcenters: Bombay, India; Tel Aviv, Israel; Antwerp, Belgium; and NewYork.
Of all diamonds mined, only 15 percent will end up in jewelry,but these represent 80 percent of the value of the world's diamondproduction.
The organization is fighting the lackluster sales trend bytrying to create new demand.
Last year, it spent $160 million onadvertising and promotion, trying, for example, to boost purchasesof men's diamond jewelry.
De Beers insists it seeks long-term stability and prosperity forthe industry, saying price fluctuations would undermine confidencein the value of diamonds.
While other commodities markets havesuffered repeated convulsions, rough diamond prices haven't fallensince the organization started announcing price changes in 1964.
Even its fiercest competitors laud De Beers for putting upconsiderable amounts of money and assuming the risks to developmines and support the market.
But producers criticize the organization's secretiveness andwhat they call its arbitrary valuation system.
Some want more ofthe industry's millions of jobs relocated in their own countries.
Formally known as De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., and based inKimberley, South Africa, the company was formed in 1888 by theBritish industrial colonialist Cecil Rhodes.
He died in 1957 and wassucceeded by his son, Harry Oppenheimer, who has made the companymore internationally minded and therefore less vulnerable.
Now 81, Oppenheimer still serves on De Beers' board ofdirectors, of which he previously was chairman.
His 44-year-old sonand heir apparent, Nicholas, is deputy to Chairman Julian OgilvieThompson.
