Introduction:President Bush on Monday nominated Clarence Thomas, a conservative Republicanwith a controversial record on civil rights, to replace retiring JusticeThurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court.
Thomas,barely half the age of the man whose seat he was named to fill, came of age inthe world that Marshall helped create.
Now the question is to what extentThomas would add weight to the court's new majority that appears willing todismantle important parts of the legacy that Marshall helped to build.
While not much is known about Thomas' views on most issues likely to comebefore the court, he has made clear his opposition to affirmative action andto policies that can be viewed as incorporating quotas or racial preferences.
However, in other respects, this nominationis very much a wild card both for conservatives who jumped instantly toembrace it and for liberals whose responses ranged from cautious to hostile.
Studied for priesthoodThomas attended Roman Catholicschools through college and studied for the priesthood.
Although the CatholicChurch vigorously opposes abortion, Thomas has apparently never taken a publicposition on abortion or on the dimensions of the constitutional right toprivacy, on which the right to abortion was based.
His position onaffirmative action is probably sufficient to shift the court's direction sincethe court remains closely divided.
"My opposition to preferences andquotas not only is a constitutional, legal opposition, it has been a moral,ethical opposition," he said five years ago at a conference sponsored by theAnti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
In its most recentaffirmative-action decision, a year ago, the court split 5-4 in upholding aFederal Communications Commission policy that gives preference to blacks andmembers of other minorities in acquiring some radio and television licenses.
The views of Justice David Souter,Brennan's successor, remain largely unknown.
Views on big issues unknown; Thomas' views on the other major issues remain unknown, although the 1990confirmation hearing for his seat on the Court of Appeals was widely viewed onCapitol Hill and in ideological interest groups as a rehearsal for a SupremeCourt nomination.
Leaders of abortion rights groups said Monday that they would press the Senateto deny confirmation to Thomas unless he expresses his support for the SupremeCourt's abortion precedents, including continued adherence to Roe vs. Wade,the 1973 ruling that established the constitutional right to abortion.
Abortion faction speaks out"The Souter model of silence and evasion that wesaw last year is absolutely unacceptable," said Kate Michelman, executivedirector of the National Abortion Rights Action League.
Sen. HowardMetzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat who serves on the Judiciary Committee, endorsedMichelman's position.
"I'm through reading tea leaves and voting in thedark," he said.
But the Judiciary Committee includes some of the mostconservative Democrats in the Senate as well several combative Republicanconservatives.
At his side stood a black manwho was 5 years old when Marshall won his Supreme Court argument in Brown vs.the Board of Education and who was a college freshman when Marshall joined theSupreme Court.
Wellbefore Bush presented Thomas to the country Monday, it was clear that thatchapter in the court's history is largely closed and that a new page was aboutto be turned.
After Monday's nomination, some -- but by no means all -- of theblanks on that page have been filled in.
After the committee makes arecommendation, the nomination will be voted on by the full Senate.
Ifconfirmed promptly, Thomas could be on the Supreme Court by the time it beginshearing cases in October.
