Introduction:   Allegations of police racism and brutalityhave shaken this city that for decades has prided itself on aprogressive attitude toward civil rights and a reputation for racialharmony.
You can only wind the watch sotightly before it's going to snap.
I think we're approaching thatbreaking point,'' said Van Hayden, 25, a student who says policebeat him at the hotel.
The city's police chief, John Laux, says there is no reason toassume the department would be immune to a problem that is presentin all segments of society.
In a letter to police supervisors in mid-February, Laux said:``Let me make one thing perfectly clear _ any act of bias will bedealt with directly and severely.
There will be no tolerance forthat type of inexcusable behavior.''
Some, including Hayden, say that image now blocks progress.
``I think this city has to wake up.
``Ifwe get preoccupied with the image of the city, we're not going to beable to thoroughly address the problems we're facing.''
``The liberal image is a false picture,'' said Chris Nisan, aUniversity of Minnesota student who has been involved in recentprotests.
In a series of rallies in recent weeks, protesters demanded thatofficers involved in the drug raid be suspended, charges againstthose arrested at the hotel be dropped, and that a citizen policereview board be established.
``There are bad apples in every bunch and the Minneapolis PoliceDepartment is no exception,'' said Councilwoman Sayles Belton.
Lloyd Smalley, 71, and Lillian Weiss, 65, were killed Jan. 25 ina fire that started after police hurled a stun grenade into theirapartment, where others also lived, during a drug raid.
No one conducting the raid knew the elderly people were livingthere, said Laux.
A grand jury decided not to bring charges againstany officers, but an FBI investigation is continuing.
Laux said his officershave denied using racial names and said protesters lied about thenumber of people receiving medical attention following the arrests.
``The matter of police misconduct and brutality has been going onfor at least the 21 years I've been here, but I think the deathspushed the issue beyond the point of tolerance that usually is thecase in matters of police misconduct,'' Glover said.
``There is deep resentment in both the black community and amongpolice officers with regard to how they feel they are perceived byeach other ...
The panel can only makerecommendations.
Our goal is to find out who can offer that to us andin what form,'' said Laux.
