Introduction:Backed by public antipathy toward the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster, Gov.
At the same time, it was disclosed that federal officials are probing the possibility that Exxon's 987-foot oil tanker was on autopilot shortly before it ran aground and that the electronic navigation aid confused the crew and contributed to the accident.
After meeting personally with top executives from three of the seven oil companies that own the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. earlier in the week, Cowper asked them to respond by noon Thursday to his six-point safety plan.
As the deadline approached, the three companies -- ARCO Alaska, BP America and Exxon USA -- responded with a six-page list of ideas.
In one proposed draft of an order, continuation of routine operations at the Alyeska Marine Terminal near the town of Valdez is described as creating "a substantial potential risk of additional oil spill" because the consortium has failed to demonstrate it can manage a large spill with minimal environmental effects.
Installation of Booms  -- The installation of containment booms around all oil tankers in the harbor.
-- A limit of one tanker being loaded at a time until all designated cleanup equipment is in place, and the end of all loading within 72 hours if cleanup equipment is not ready.
Failure to comply with the emergency order would carry penalties that range from fines to criminal prosecution and jailing of company officials.
"We want the oil industry to be ready for a spill of this magnitude if it happens tomorrow," Cowper said.
"There is going to have to be a plan that satisfies us, our people, and it will be tough.
If it isn't complied with, we don't have any remedy available to us except shut down the terminal.
And we'll do it."
State law gives the governor the authority to close the terminal if it does not meet state oil-cleanup plan requirements.
It also would badly pinch the state treasury, which relies on oil taxes and royalties for 85% of its income.
Cowper said he would seek special legislation to tap Alaska's $10-billion Permanent Fund, a kind of super budget reserve, should any terminal shutdown last long enough to cause short-term funding woes for the state.
Meanwhile, the chairman of Exxon Corp. told Congress Thursday that the third mate who was on the bridge of the Exxon Valdez when it ran aground has told company lawyers that he turned off the ship's automatic pilot in an effort to avoid the reef. "
My understanding is that he turned that computer off and it was not as if it hit the rocks on automatic pilot," Exxon Chairman Lawrence G. Rawl said in testimony before the Senate Commerce Committee.
Coast Guard spokesman Bruce Pimental in Valdez said investigators still are trying to determine if the autopilot actually was used the night of the accident and if it was, when it was turned off.
"The helm will not respond if it's in autopilot," he said.
Also on Thursday, the former captain of the Exxon Valdez, Joseph Hazelwood, left jail in New York after a judge slashed his bail from $500,000 to $25,000.
The judge who had imposed the earlier bail is an environmentalist and former commercial fisherman.
