As her daughters watched, Pierluissi, 24, said it was for them,as much as for herself, that she agreed to be tested for the deadlykiller of Hispanics.
Hispanics are three times as likely to develop diabetesas the general population, and 40 percent of the 700,000 victims inTexas are Mexican-American.
More than 150,000 Americans die from diabetes each year; another150,000 deaths are diabetes-related, according to the AmericanDiabetes Association.
No one really knows what sparks it, but researchers believeHispanics could hold the key.
San Antonio, the nation's ninthlargest city, with a population that is 50 percent Hispanic, isbecoming the base for diabetes studies.
Epidemiologist Dr. Michael Stern has devoted 10 years to studyingHispanic diabetes and led the grassroots study of the most commonform, which develops mostly in obese adults over 40 who may have afamily history of the disease.
Stern said family studies of diabetic patients are brining himcloser to finding the gene that triggers the disease, and to ascreening test.
Researchers believe that poor Hispanics' diets of cheap,processed foods, lack of exercise and infrequent medical attention _either due to poverty or a cultural bias against doctors _ increasestheir risk of acquiring diabetes.
Educating elementary-school-age children about healthy dietswould help reduce the number of diabetes cases, DeFronzo said.
El-Shiekh and his students are developing machinery to braid longstrands of ceramic fibers.
The parts will withstand speeds of 50,000 mph andtemperatures of at least 4,000 degrees.
While much of his work relates to the Mars Mission ResearchCenter here, El-Shiekh sees a big future for composite materialslike ceramic fibers.
``The day may very well come when you are driving around with carengine parts of ceramic fiber,'' he said, adding that thevibration-damping properties of the materials also would make themgood for torsion bars in cars.
``We also are working on the idea of putting this braided fabricin concrete as reinforcing material instead of metal rods,'' hesaid.
``It is stronger than steel, does not rust and would not wearaway _ the road would not deteriorate.''
said El-Shiekh, who canproduce shapes ranging from hollow cubes to panels that haveopenings for wiring and conduits already braided into them.
``Thebig problem is cost and that's why we're working on this automatedmachinery.''
Behind the swinging doors,Dr.
``Have you taken any drugs?''
It's a question that has become more and more commonplace inemergency rooms already burdened by increased patient loads.
``There is an emergency in the emergency room right now in notonly New York and Boston but around the country and for a variety ofreasons,'' said Ken Raske, president of the Greater New YorkHospital Association.
From 1986 to 1987, according to the National Institute on DrugAbuse, cocaine-related cases in emergency rooms increased 122percent in the District of Columbia; 86 percent in both Boston andAtlanta; 80 percent in Detroit; 73 percent in Chicago; 53 percent inMinneapolis; 50 percent in Texas, and 39 percent in New York City.
