Introduction: The brutal beating of Rodney Glen King by Los Angelespolicemen offers convincing evidence that a code of silenceexists within that department, but it also illustrates asimilar reluctance of the nation's police chiefs to criticizea fellow chief.
Four officers took turns kicking and beatingan unresisting victim for more than two minutes.
Thesecriminals in uniform would not have dared their brutality hadthey feared that any of the 17 other police officers watchingwould report their criminal actions.
Yet we, his fellow police chiefs, have for years remainedsilent about Mr. Gates, who yesterday was put on a 60-dayleave by the Los Angeles Police Commission.
A police chief plays an essential role in setting theclimate in which his department operates.
Through the yearsMr.
Gates has made public statements clearly at odds with thenew concept of community policing, in which officers workwith citizens to improve neighborhoods and prevent crime.
The exchange soundedmore like one gang challenging another than a police chiefseeking to reduce conflict in the community.
Indeed theRambo-like challenge did not lower violence, and may haveincreased it.
Hundreds of gang homicides occur every year inLos Angeles despite sweeps by the city's police.
But this kind of reasoning isforeign to a man who publicly claimed that his SWAT teamcould free the Iranian hostages.
Mr. Gates opposed the Police Corps because its members wouldnot be professionals.
Yet the presence of such"non-professionals" would discourage the racism and brutalityexposed by the Rodney King beating.
Such attitudes surviveonly in a closed police culture.
The presence of even onepolice corps officer witness would have deterred the criminalcops.
Many chiefs openly disagreed with Mr. Gates when heopposed the Police Corps Bill in Congress.
We should be asopenly critical of his other statements.
More recently, he describedthe killer of a policewoman as an "El Salvadoran, whoshouldn't have been here. "
The nationality of the murdererwas irrelevant.
Two years ago, on a national television documentary, Mr. Gates defended a special unit that had shot many criminalsduring stakeouts.
Even more recently, Mr. Gates told theSenate that "casual drug users should be taken out and shot.
Mayor Tom Bradley told themedia that such conduct wouldn't be tolerated, and that thewrongdoers would be sought out for punishment.
Presumably, the chief has now received wiser council.
He hascalled for prosecution of three of the officers, and hasproduced a videotape for his troops condemning the beating.
Yet, it's hard toimagine commanders preaching restraint in light of thechief's constant belligerent pronouncements.
Even Mr. Gates's apology to Mr. King sent the wrongmessage.
He said that he hoped the incident might help Mr. King to straighten out his life.
It is hard to imaginesomeone unlawfully beaten by uniformed officers as otherslooked on being inspired to respect law and order.
Or was thechief suggesting that the beating was a warning againstfurther run-ins with the police?Clearly, Daryl Gates's words and actions create doubtabout his claim that the Rodney King incident was anaberration.
But the videotape of theLAPD brutality affects the credibility of all policeofficers.
