A 'not this Nafta' rally on Saturday provided little competition for thecollege 'game of the century' - Florida State University against Notre Dame.
Only 115 demonstrators turned out amid the autumn foliage in the grounds ofVirginia's capitol in Richmond.
Theorganisers said they were sending a message to Virginia's three waveringcongressmen that a 'yes' vote on Nafta in the House on Wednesday would be'remembered in November'.
'We are absolutely for free trade,' says Mr Bill Diggitt, the state directorof Mr Perot's United We Stand. '
But Nafta undermines our constitution.
Itputs decision-making in the hands of international panels, which underminesour judicial system.'
He says he is concerned about the loss of Virginia'stax base as companies move production to Mexico and place continuousdownward pressure on wages.
Mr Josh Greenwood, owner of a small hydroelectric company, says: 'I mightrun against my congressman myself.
They had better housing and better sanitary conditions than theworkers in Mexico today.
The babies of the slaves weren't born with braindamage from concentrated pollution.
The three undecided havefound themselves in the eye of a lobbying whirlwind.
The coalition - 100 of the state's largest businesses and 500 small andmedium-sized companies - counter-attacked with an 'education' campaign.
The anti-Nafta forces on Saturday published long lists of businesscontributors to the pro-Nafta congressmen. '
Constituents only have votes togive, and it seems these congressmen are having a hard time hearing theirmessage,' the cover page said.
One was reported to have beenpromised that a manufacturing research centre would be located in hisdistrict.
'He says he had a bad feeling about the agreement in his gut.
But if he is offered a decent project,he says he might find it tough to say no.
'In Portsmouth, Virginia, one of the last undecided congressmen, OwenPickett, is in his district office, as he is every weekend.
His door bears asign, 'This office belongs to the people of the second district ofVirginia'.The unionised port workers are urging opposition.
The military, whichcomprises most of the district's voters, are worried about jobs in the faceof Pentagon cutbacks. '
