Introduction:IN BLOOD-RED letters, the sign on the front window of the Dealers Outlet gun store in suburban Phoenix declared: "Urgent!
Stop the Gun Ban!"
Inside, customers took time out from browsing through AK-47 assault rifles and a flock of other firearms to sign a petition -- and to vent their wrath at a local "turncoat," U.S. Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.).
"If we allow the government to become involved in any type of gun control, we are violating a basic constitutional right, the right to keep and bear arms."
The petitioners' target that sunny day last spring was DeConcini, a longtime opponent of gun-control measures who had suddenly switched sides, sponsoring one of the nine bills currently in Congress to ban the sale of assault weapons.
"I'm a one-issue voter, and I'm going to do everything in my power to take DeConcini out," George Hiers, a burly man on crutches, vowed as he bought a semiautomatic shotgun for his wife to defend herself with while he's away on hunting trips.
The attack on DeConcini was stirred up by the National Rifle Assn.
Long described as "the powerful gun lobby," the NRA is now scrambling to recover from stunning setbacks in the past three years.
And most recently, the group found itself caught in the furor over assault weapons that was ignited by the massacre of five children in a Stockton schoolyard last January.
The ban so infuriated some NRA members that they have launched petition drives in two dozen states to oust Bush from the organization.
Meanwhile, California, whose voters only seven years ago defeated an initiative that would have frozen the number of handguns in the state, last May became the first state to ban assault weapons.
"We're going to go down the road of either prohibitive firearms regulations or tough criminal justice provisions" -- that is, more prosecutors, penalties and prisons, the course sought by the NRA.
Call Now!
Write Today!
"I don't want to see guns outlawed," Jonas said, "because I like to collect guns."
Probably no other organization in the world floods government officials with as many phone calls, letters, telegrams and visits from its members as the NRA.
Charles J. Orasin, president of 15-year-old Handgun Control -- the NRA's chief nemesis -- estimates that as many as 500,000 members of the NRA and other gun groups regularly lobby elected officials and bureaucrats.
The outpouring is prompted by red-alert mailings churned out by NRA leaders, all sounding essentially the same alarm: They're out to get your guns.
These letters go not only to the NRA's 2.9 million members, whose $25 annual membership fee brings such benefits as a magazine, gun-theft insurance and safety instruction, but also to 10,000 affiliated hunting organizations and shooting-competition groups.
Time and again, the NRA has proved that citizen action generated by such mailings can have far more effect on legislation than opinion polls, especially when a majority for gun control is relatively silent. "
If a lawmaker is looking for an excuse to vote with the NRA, all he has to say is, 'I got a hundred calls from the NRA, but none from the other side,' " said a congressional aide.
It was one of these red-alert warnings, written by NRA lobbyist Baker, that had been delivered to 100,000 gun owners in Arizona and riled up the customers at the Dealers Outlet outside Phoenix.
Baker's letter assailed DeConcini's bill, a scaled-down version of the one enacted by California in May.
DeConcini's bill calls for a nationwide ban on sales of AK-47s and eight other semiautomatic rifles -- guns enjoying wide popularity because they have the menacing look and much of the firepower of fully automatic assault weapons used by the military and police.
And many semiautomatics can easily be converted to automatic weapons.)
who bring cocaine by the planeload .
Baker's letter asked.
It concluded with a call to arms, warning that DeConcini "needs to know we will not allow our constitutional freedoms to be strangled by restrictions that have absolutely no effect on the criminals who are supposed to be the real target!
In three weeks, DeConcini's office received 6,395 calls and letters against his bill and 68 for it, despite a poll indicating that more than two-thirds of the people in metropolitan Phoenix favor some kind of ban on assault weapons.
"I've been to the four corners of Arizona, and people are shocked and dismayed" by DeConcini's bill, said Landis Aden, a motorcycle-riding computer technician who lobbies part time for the Arizona NRA.
He said he had sold three years' stock of assault rifles in the two weeks after Bush issued a temporary import ban in March.
"We stood behind DeConcini at the last election, and we feel he has completely betrayed us."
I think that will hurt everybody and not help anybody.
You think that by attempting to burn your friends you can .
If the alternative were something more strict than DeConcini's legislation, how would you feel then?
Metzenbaum is going to come from somewhere out of left field."
Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum (D-Ohio) is pushing a ban that is much broader than DeConcini's.
If any S.O.B.
DeConcini, an NRA "Person of the Month" last year, said that NRA officials "flat told me, 'We can't negotiate' " on his bill because "they were burned so badly last year when they negotiated with (then-Atty.
Gen. Edwin) Meese on banning plastic guns.
Now they need to get members and money, and that's why they're doing this to me.
If I weren't a mature person, I'd say, 'Up yours.
Now I'm going to be a gun-control advocate, and you're going to lose me.'
" Later, he said at a Senate hearing on his bill: "By using these tactics, the NRA is succeeding only in alienating its friend closest to the fight."
A subcommittee was getting ready to vote on a bill that would ban a list of semiautomatic assault weapons, and Hammer had asked to speak against it.
Only 4 feet, 11 inches tall, she could barely be seen as she took the podium.
To her supporters, Hammer represents all that is strong about the NRA; to her detractors, much that is weak.
Attacking the crux of the bill, Hammer told the subcommittee: "You cannot differentiate between semiautomatic firearms that look menacing and your routine sporting firearms because, functionally, they are the same."
I would suggest to you that it would not be the first time that the fox has been in the henhouse."
Finally, as NRA Washington lobbyist Baker had done in his letter to Arizona gun owners, Hammer charged that a loosely worded definition in the Florida bill would inadvertently ban all semiautomatic rifles and shotguns.
But doomed as well, she claimed, would be firearms of traditional design long used by hunters and target shooters in one of the nation's gun-owningest states.
After all, two years earlier, Hammer had led a phenomenal victory for the NRA in Florida, winning passage of measures that threw out all locally imposed gun restrictions.
Testimonials to Hammer's lobbying efforts -- not to mention her marksmanship with muzzle-loading rifles -- cover the walls of her office.
Despite her past successes, however, the House panel voted 5-1 to pass the assault-weapons bill along to the full Criminal Justice Committee.
But the surprising setback symbolized the NRA's shifting fortunes, not only in Florida, but across the nation.
"The NRA has been unreasonable with their positions for so long, it's catching up with them now," asserted Rep. Ronald A.
One of the NRA's major problems, he said, is that a number of legislative allies have been angered by its strong-arm tactics when the group decided they went astray.
Grant Jr., a conservative Tampa Republican who heads a companion Senate committee, was being interviewed about prospects for an assault-weapons ban.
When they said I was part of the Gestapo last year, that was a little out of order."
Hammer explained later that Grant was referring to a newsletter in which she had said that a bill in his committee "sets up a modern-day Gestapo movement" because it threatened to invalidate many concealed-weapon permits.
Nevertheless, Grant was so enraged that he had an aide call NRA officials in Washington to demand her removal.
"They wrote the most vicious letters," he said.
Because of the NRA's unwillingness to sit down and work out a reasonable solution to problems perceived by the public, it makes it much more difficult to get their mission accomplished," he said.
Said Hammer: "He's very bitter, but I have a job to do.
For instance, the day of the House subcommittee vote on assault weapons, she was outmaneuvered by Bernard Horn, the state legislative director for Handgun Control, who had flown in from Washington.
Horn gave legislators a booklet picturing both the 27 guns proposed for banning and other semiautomatic rifles that were not on the list but that are popular with hunters.
The move was aimed at shattering the NRA's claim that only cosmetic differences exist between assault weapons and sporting guns.
Because of the booklet, she said, she was no longer willing to support merely a limit on the capacity of ammunition clips -- a fallback position to which Hammer had reluctantly acceded.
Now, Hanson said, she favored banning the guns themselves.
Eventually, Hammer was able to minimize her losses.
Instead of banning assault weapons, the Legislature in June created a commission to study them.
And, instead of enacting a seven-day waiting period for gun buyers, as sought by Handgun Control, it required dealers to make a less-comprehensive background check by telephoning a police computer.
Although a Handgun Control news release declared, "Florida Deals NRA Fourth Loss of Year," Hammer was able to say with some justification, "I think we did pretty good."
Shortly after adjourning, the Legislature was called back into special session to reconsider a bill that would make it illegal for gun owners to carelessly leave weapons around children.
The shift came after the murders of two Kennedys and a King inspired passage of major federal gun regulations in 1968.
In his seventh-floor office, Jim Baker -- one of five in-house lobbyists supplemented by four high-powered outsiders -- had put the finishing touches on his letter to Arizona gun owners, slamming DeConcini's bill.
"You don't need any particular gun.
But I don't think you should have to justify anything in terms of need.
You ought to be able to own within reasonable limits what you want.
The question is whether these proposals will fight crime effectively, and we think highly restrictive gun controls are a bankrupt concept."
Cassidy said a number of concerned NRA members wrote him, asking, "What are you going to do about this?"
He wrote back, asking, "What do you want me to do?
I can't recall him, he's out of office -- he's an American legend."
Tom Korologos, one of the NRA's well-connected outside lobbyists, recalled another example of the difficulty of fighting off assault-weapon bans.
It looked for all the world like Rambo's personal gun."
An NRA operative conceded that, despite a tough "no-compromise" resolution unanimously adopted at the national convention, the NRA might have to back a compromise bill when Congress takes final action on assault weapons.
Actually, in the face of increasingly well-organized support for gun control, the NRA grudgingly compromised on cop-killer bullets in 1986 and plastic guns in 1988.
The organization's revenues last year included $45.4 million from membership dues and $9.4 million from contributions.
In 1988, five incumbents and all 15 challengers supported by the NRA were defeated; although 182 incumbents won, the NRA netted no gain with the $770,000 it poured into campaigns.
For the assault-weapons fight, the NRA has sent dozens of police officers to Washington to offset pro-ban lobbying by police chiefs, launched a national newspaper and TV ad campaign and continued to make available to gun owners a 900 toll phone number that has already produced thousands of NRA form letters to President Bush and members of Congress.
For a while, the NRA harshly retaliated against police chiefs who spoke out for gun control, seeking to get chiefs fired in Nashville, Tenn., and Baltimore County, Md.
of Chiefs of Police, said that he and NRA President Joe Foss recently agreed to "keep the debate issue-oriented, without personal attacks."
The most frequent charge against the NRA is the one leveled by DeConcini -- that it lies and exaggerates.
Denying this, Baker said "a survey of Congress" by the American Library Assn.
had found that the library group and the NRA "supplied the most accurate information" of all lobbying organizations.
"To have the NRA use that in support of their policies is beyond ludicrous," she said.
A Prayer for Arms AT THE NRA's national convention in April, more than 16,000 people roamed across 160,000 square feet of exhibits at St. Louis' convention center.
They clicked the triggers of super-light Glock 17 pistols.
And then, during a break, 1,000 NRA activists filed into a cavernous hall where Merrill L. (Pete) Petoskey, a wildlife biologist from Lewiston, Mich., delivered the opening prayer at the NRA's 118th annual meeting.
"Please help and guide the leaders of the National Rifle Association and of this nation to preserve and strengthen this freedom and this right.
"Amen."
Addressing the meeting, NRA President Foss acknowledged that the beleaguered group could, indeed, use more help.
He called on the nation's 70 million gun owners "to get off their duffs if they want to keep their guns."
Then, accepting an ornate flintlock rifle from the NRA for his years of support, Heston hoisted it above his head as if it were a stone tablet.
For an army of crusaders besieged, it was just the rousing send-off needed for the tough battles ahead.
