Introduction:SLOVENES always had at least as much in common with their Alpine neighboursas with their Balkan partners in the former Yugoslavia.
But he, like Mr Janez Drnovsek, the prime minister of Slovenia'sthree-pronged coalition government, makes clear that Slovenia sufferseconomically from the disintegration of Yugoslavia and would be one of theprincipal gainers from a resolution of the bloody Balkan imbroglio.
'Slovenia's southern border with Croatia has become the border between peaceand war in Europe,' Mr Kucan declares.
The new Karavanke road tunnel beneath the Alps, completed justbefore the 10-day war between Slovenia and the Yugoslav army whichimmediately followed indep- endence, has underlined Slovenia's traditionalimportance as a transit route.
The railways and the motorway leading south through the capital Ljubljana tothe Slovenian port of Koper and its Italian neighbour Trieste carry freightand travellers heading to and from central Europe and the Adriatic sea.
Thehighway is also thick with aid trucks and an ever-decreasing volume of'normal' cargoes moving south-east towards Croatia.
Independence has, above all, brought peace to Slovenia and left it free toimplement the kind of rational market reforms and privatisation policieswhich remain blocked in the republics absorbed and impoverished by warfurther south.
Economists, however, are quick to point out that independence has its costs.
Its per capita GDP of around Dollars 6,000 was three times higher than thatof Serbia and five times that of Kosovo, the poorest region of the formerYugoslavia.
Slovenia has always had a strong tourism industry of its own.
So have the transit tourists throughSlovenia.
Now Slovenia has to lower real wagesand increase productivity in order to compensate.
On the positive side of the balance sheet, however, the end of the federalstate means that Slovenia no longer has to contribute over Dollars 1bn ayear to finance the bloated Yugoslav army or see its hard currency deposits'frozen' by the National Bank of Yugoslavia, as happened beforeindependence.
The first of these is the border itself, which is disputed in parts.
Thesecond issue contains Croatia's share of the running costs of the Krskonuclear plant on Slovenian territory.
The war, with its violent and deliberate displacement of millions of people,has and is taking place in the ethnically mixed border lands of Croatia andBosnia relatively distant from the Slovene border.
Both Mr Kucan and MrDrnovsek, who headed the old revolving Yugoslav state presidency for a yearbefore negotiating the exodus of the federal army from Slovenia in July1991, criticise the failure of the west to intervene more forcibly to stopat an early stage what Mr Kucan calls 'the war of aggression waged bySerbia.
'The president is particularly scathing against what he calls the west'sdefinition of the war in Bosnia as a civil or ethnic war. '
Of course thepeople who are dying do not care how it is defined.
But for the inter-national community it is essential to define it as a war of aggressionagainst a UN- recognised state and draw the appropriate conclusions.
The border with Croatia is now in effect sealed against further immigationafter 70,000 refugees, equivalent to 3.5 per cent of the local population,were taken in.
Many are expected to stay even after the war ends.
Meanwhile, the coalition government which emerged from last December'selections to the national parliament and parallel presidential elections, isdetermined to use its four-year mandate to complete the transformation ofthe country into a fully-fledged, market-orientated, multi-partyparliamentary democracy.
At the core of the government is an alliance between the Liberal Democrats,headed by Mr Drnovsek, which emerged as the largest single party with 25 percent of seats in parliament, and the Christian Democrats led by Mr LojzePeterle, the foreign minister.
But the coalition also includes the fourparty 'associated list', made up principally of reformed communists.
Thishelps to give the coalition a wider parliamentary base.
