Introduction: NEGOTIATIONS FOR a new contract between Botswana, the world's most importantdiamond producer in value terms, and De Beers, the South African group whichcontrols 80 per cent of the market for rough (uncut) diamonds, are takingmuch longer than expected.
The previous three-year contract ended onDecember 31.Some Botswana politicians want to change De Beers' exclusive sales contractso that part of their country's output can be sold independently of theSouth African group's international cartel.
This would give Botswana its own'market window' to see what its diamonds are worth in the free market.
Mr Nicholas Oppenheimer, chairman of thegroup's Central Selling Organisation, argues that if Botswana chose not tosell its production exclusively through his organisation, the CSO's abilityto regulate the distribution of rough diamonds would be compromised.
On a political level this would enable the government toanswer its critics or its electors with confidence and sure knowledge whenquestioned about arrangements for the disposal of the country's mineralassets.
'If Botswana were to sell 10 per cent of its rough diamond production, worthabout USDollars 100m, independently of the CSO - which sells about Dollars4bn-worth a year from all over the world - it would represent no threat tomarket stability, IDC said.
'It is not unreasonable to reflect whether the fact that Botswana is theonly major producer currently selling 100 per cent of its production to theCSO has any bearing on the substantial profits made by the CSO on the saleof its diamonds.
'Other substantial producers such as the Soviet Union, Angola, Zaire andAustralia do not sell all their production to the CSO and therefore haveaccess to independent market information.
Mr Geoffrey Leggett at IDC suggests, however, the valuer only ensures thatthe assortment of diamonds from Botswana conforms to an agreed sample andthat the agreed contract price is paid. '
He is not a trader, he does notknow what the stones are worth in the market.
'De Beers insists it remains on cordial terms with Botswana and says thecountry is still selling its diamonds through the CSO.
There has been a special relationship between the CSO and Botswana since1987 when the country sold its diamond stockpile to De Beers in exchange foran estimated USDollars 250m and a 5.27 per cent shareholding in the SouthAfrican group.
Analysts suggest market conditions do not help Botswana press its case.
Prices of rough diamonds, with few exceptions, have moved upwards every yearsince the 1930s depression.
To maintain price stability, the CSO is stockpiling diamonds at greatexpense, rather than releasing unwanted stones to the market.
The CSO has also notched up some recent coups: bringing a big part of theSoviet Union's and Angola's rough diamond output back into the cartel - orwhat it calls its 'single channel marketing' - arrangements.
A delegation from Botswana is to meet CSO representatives in London at theend of this month for another attempt to break the deadlock.
