Introduction: Exxon officials Monday released a revisedplan for cleansing 364 miles of Alaskan coastline fouled by thenation's largest oil spill, but said their proposal requires asuspension of local environmental laws.
The plan makes no provisions for continuing the cleanup beyondmid-September, and notes that 191 miles of lightly oiled coastlinemay not be cleaned mechanically at all, but be allowed to be washednaturally by the environment.
``We are going to have to take a hard look at that,'' respondedBill Lamoreaux, the ranking state environmental official monitoringthe cleanup.
Exxon's plan calls for the recovered waste to be strained forusable oil that can be refined, and said the oil-laced wastewatercould be treated at the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co.'s disposalplant in Valdez.
The gunk and sludge that resists treatment or salvage will beburned or buried, according to the Exxon study.
Before the plan was released, Yost said he wanted much moredetail than Exxon's original cleanup plan, which included nothingon polluted areas outside the sound.
The damage stretches along 260 miles of rocky, rugged coastlinesouthwestward from Cape Douglas some 500 miles from Valdez, parksuperintendent Ray Bane said Monday.
``The oil has made landfall in large quantities in Katmai Bayand Hallo Bay.
We have seen severalhundred sea otters swimming in oil.
The oil has had an impact onvirtually the entire coastline of the park,'' Bane said.
Bane said an aerial survey showed an amorphous oil patch 10miles wide and more than 20 miles long in the Shelikof Strait,which is located along the migration route used by whales.
Exxon is feeling the effects of the spill far beyond Alaskawaters.
In Anchorage, a group called the Boycott Exxon Alliance hasscheduled a rally in front of Exxon's Alaska headquarters.
The attorneys general of Idaho, Oregon and Washington statescheduled a news conference Tuesday to call for a federalinvestigation into the sharp rise in the price of gasoline sincethe spill.
The oil industry blames the spill and crude oil prices that haverisen $7 a barrel since January for higher prices at the gas pumps.
Exxon also received sharp criticism from the federal government,which accused the company of ``foot-dragging'' in the constructionof a second facility in Seward to aid in the cleanup of sea ottersfouled by the oil.
The animals depend on their thick fur forinsulation against the cold water but the oil ruins the insulationeffect.
