Introduction:Folkestone, England -- " We've been fighting the bastardssince 1066" was the taxi driver's response to myfaint-hearted suggestion that the Channel tunnel, one end ofwhich we were making our way toward, signaled a new epoch inAnglo-French relations.
Had he read my mind, or just the sameedition of the Sun, which that morning had offered the BlackDeath, Paris streets "ankle deep in dog mess," and acomparatively high suicide rate (in France "suicide relievesthe daily grind") among its 10 reasons to hate the French?
The chalk marl under the Channel may beperfectly pliable; the spirit of gloom and resentment aboutthe tunnel (though the disgruntled always are noisier thanthe positive or the indifferent) may prove more intractable.
Nevertheless, after at least 20 false starts since 1802,the project to join England to "Europe" is irreversibly underway.
This attempt, which began life on Feb. 12, 1986, atCanterbury with the signing of the Tunnel Treaty by MargaretThatcher and Francois Mitterrand (whose Rolls-Roycereportedly was met with flying eggs and chants of "Froggy,Froggy, Froggy, Out, Out, Out"), promises to be completed andopen for business by June 1993.The British terminal may be seen, or at least imagined,below a ledge of dewy grass near Dover, dotted with poppiesand daisies, with church spires in one direction and thewhite cliffs in another.
Slow tractors are piling up walls ofearth, cranes and pulleys hoist slabs of cast concretethrough a jungle of rusting iron armatures.
Later, I get close to the toy chest, the construction campin the shadow of Shakespeare Cliff, where nearly 1,000 ofthem live. "
Farthingloe Village -- a new concept in communityliving" -- consists of 42 featureless blocks, spike-toppedfencing, floodlights, security guards and warnings that "Allpersonnel may be searched on leaving the premises"; residentspay #45, or $80, a week.
But the men staying here -- most ofthem migrant laborers from Ireland and northern England --are rumored to earn as much as $1,750 a week.
Inside the tunnel it is cold and wet and dark, but mainlyit's big.
We few journalists, looking weedy as hell clutchingour notebooks, trudge along in borrowed boots on a guidedtour past some very large men (inwardly I take back all Ithought, from the safety of the dewy green, poppy-sprayedledge, about "toys").
The total length of each tunnel will be 32 miles, 25of which will be under the sea.
Seven thousand British and4,000 French workers, on eight- to 12-hour shifts, havecompleted more than half of the job.
Of the three tunnels --two big ones for trains and another for service -- thesmallest is the most advanced: They've bored more than 27miles.
The breakthrough is expected by November.
The boring machines are fantastic: guided by satellite,gyroscope, computer and laser, these monsters, equipped withCuisinart-style blades more than 16 feet wide, can chop andshred chalk at about 15 feet an hour, or 650-1,000 feet aweek.
The 1986 treaty, which contains a clause prohibitinggovernment subsidies for the tunnel, gave a 55-yearconcession to Eurotunnel, an Anglo-French partnership thatcommissioned Trans Manche Link, a consortium of five Englishcontractors (Costain, Wimpey, Taylor Woodrow, Balfour Beattyand Tarmac) and five French (Boygues, Dumez, Societe Generaled'Entreprise, Societe Auxiliaire d'Entreprises, SpieBatignolles) to design and build the tunnel.
The originalforecast for the whole project was $8.5 billion; to thechagrin of the 206 banks involved, it now has reached $13.3billion and many people estimate tunnel costs of $17.5billion before we see the light at the end.
All this for mad dogs and Frenchmen in 1993?
Not quite.
And for the rest of us, it will mean that you can climbaboard and whiz from London to Paris in three hours.
This, though, is not amatter of time or money, it's "an attitude problem."
