U.S. rescue and recovery teams said that the plane hit a mountain about 4,300 feet above sea level, having missed clearing the peak by about 300 feet.
The crash site is about 75 miles east of the Fugnido refugee camp that Leland was flying to visit when the plane vanished in heavy weather last Monday.
"If they would have flown over that peak they would have been home free," said Rep. Gary L. Ackerman (D-N.Y.), a colleague of Leland's who has accompanied search crews for the last two days and was aboard the helicopter that first spotted the wreckage Sunday.
The 44-year-old Leland, a Democrat, was making his sixth tour of refugee camps along the Ethiopia-Sudan border as chairman of the House Select Committee on Hunger, a panel he had helped to establish five years ago.
Also aboard the plane were Hugh Anderson Johnson Jr. and Patrice Yvonne Johnson, both aides to Leland (who were not related); Joyce Francine Williams, an aide to Rep. Ronald V. Dellums (D-Berkeley), and an expert on child nutrition; Y. Ivan Tillen, a New York businessman and friend of Leland's; Robert Woods, a political and economic officer at the American Embassy in Addis Ababa; Gladys Gilbert, a special projects officer for the mission of the U.S. Agency for International Development attached to the embassy; Thomas Worrick, the acting AID representative in Ethiopia, and Worrick's wife, Roberta.
A statement issued by President Bush said that "Mickey Leland and the other members of his traveling party, both Americans and Ethiopians, were engaged in a noble cause -- trying to feed the hungry. "
By Sunday, 18 aircraft, including four American helicopters, two American C-130 airplanes and 12 Ethiopian aircraft, were involved in the search.
Three more American helicopters were reported to be en route from Eglin Air Force Base in Florida when word of the discovery came.
"The terrain was fairly rugged and the weather conditions were bad getting there," said Capt.
Clair M. Gilk, commander of one of the two helicopters that were the first to spot the wreckage.
Gilk said that the crash site, in a mountainous and heavily wooded region, is so remote and inaccessible that the nearest landing site for helicopters is half a mile away, a distance that he said could take as much as three hours to cover on foot.
Recovery Planned for Today Air Force personnel were assigned to remain near the site Sunday night to keep it secure.
Because of the site's inaccessibility, it could take at least two days to recover all of the bodies, according to Maj. Gen. James F. Record, who came here from Washington to oversee the search effort.
In Washington, a Pentagon spokesman, Navy Capt.
Discovery of the crash site came at about 1:15 p.m. local time Sunday.
Ackerman said that the helicopter he was traveling in set down during the morning at an airstrip near the village of Dembi Dolo.
There, the crew came upon a Roman Catholic missionary who told them that he had heard reports from local villagers that a plane had been heard nearby last week.
Presently, the crew found an Ethiopian surveyor who said he could guide them to an area near where the plane had been heard.
The surveyor was taken aboard, crew members said, but on their way toward their destination they spotted the crash site.
Mostly Rocks and Brush' Crew members described the site as "mostly rocks and brush" and indicated that the pilot of Leland's plane may have been trying to escape bad weather on Monday by following the pathway of a river flowing through a valley.
), who with Ackerman had been flying with search crews for the last two days, said he telephoned House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) from Addis Ababa soon after the discovery was made.
He said that Foley was "heartbroken" at the news.
It appeared to be near the village of Bure.
Area Had Been Covered The area of the site had apparently been searched within the first two days after the crash by American aircraft using electronic devices in an attempt to detect an emergency signal from the downed craft.
Wheat, who was among those who had pressed Defense Department officials for the deployment of more aircraft in the search, said after the discovery Sunday: "We could have brought every plane in the world that we have, and it would not have made a difference."
President Bush, in his Sunday statement, said: "I have known, admired and worked with Mickey Leland for many years.
Our hearts go out to (his widow) and to the families and friends of the congressional staff members, State Department, Agency for International Development and Ethiopian officials who joined Mickey on his important mission and who died with him trying to carry it out."
Baker also thanked Ethiopia, a Soviet-allied country with which Washington has had strained relations for several years, for its "outstanding support" in the search for Leland's party.
Bush offered U.S. help to the Ethiopian government for its investigation into the crash of the plane.
Leland was a former Houston pharmacist who called the fight against hunger "my passion."
He leaves a wife, Alison Walton Leland, and a 3-year-old son, Jarrett.
