And the bestviewing spots are virtually in California's back yard: The Big Island ofHawaii and the southern Baja California peninsula.
With some people having booked trips as long as three years in advance,airline seats, rental cars and hotel reservations range from difficult toimpossible to get, travel agents and others report.
"The closer you get tothe event, the less there is" available, said Paul Kloetzel, president ofO'Brien Travel Service in San Jose.
"It's an event, and it rarely, rarelyhappens.
There is a certain element of traveler out there (and) there's anawful lot of those people.
"The eclipse will be seen from Hawaii tocentral Brazil.
Stars will shine.
The eclipse will last the longest -- six minutes and 58 seconds --at the center of the shadow in the town of Tuxpan, on Mexico's west coast.
Among fans of the heavens, a solar eclipse inspires awe, fascination andgrandeur.
Firm estimates aren't available, but blotted-out-sun watchers areexpected to number more than 100,000 -- perhaps 50,000 to 70,000 in Hawaii andan equal number in Baja.
Pamela and Daniel Dei Rossi of Campbell were among those scramblers.
"But they basically said they wouldn't even try -- everything was booked,"said Pamela Dei Rossi.
They called places where relatives had stayed inMexico.
No luck.
She called a friend in Hawaii for a place to stay, butairline ticket and rental car problems still loomed.
Then, good fortunestruck.
Bullock was leading a group toHawaii, and some late cancellations came up.
"Weare so excited," Pamela Dei Rossi said.
"Though travelarrangements are now tough to come by, some opportunities remain.
Two of Mexico'sbiggest cities, Gaudalajara and Mexico City, lie in the path of totality.
Sodoes Mazatlan.
Puerto Vallarta, a resort city, is only a short distanceaway.
Airline ticket availability is reported spotty for the resorts but stillavailable for other destinations.
Another possibility is to search aroundfor groups making the trip that have had late cancellations, as the Dei Rossisdid.
From theborder to the northern edge of where the eclipse will be total is about a16-hour drive, said Raul Cardenas, the Mexican consul in San Jose.
Travelers who can't produce original documentsshowing they have accommodations will be turned back, Cardenas said.
These flights are so overbooked it's actually a laughingstock," saidO'Brien's Kloetzel. "
"IFYOU'RE INTERESTED; An eight-page brochure on the July 11 eclipse is availablefor $2 from the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 390 Ashton Ave., SanFrancisco, CA 94112.
