Introduction:The Reagan administration moved to deal with the worsening drought, and a top trade official said that farm export subsidies may have to be curbed.
Concern that the drought could fuel inflation drove stocks and bonds sharply lower yesterday.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 37.16 points to close at 2094.24, while U.S. government bonds fell more than 1 1/2 points.
President Reagan appointed an interagency group to deal with the drought and Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng authorized farmers in drought parched counties in 13 states to harvest hay on idled crop land in the government's Conservation Reserve Program.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said that the president is "very concerned" about the drought, and "wants to make certain that everything that the federal government can do to assist will be done."
But he said the administration doesn't believe the drought will have "overall implications for the economy."
At a news briefing, Special Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter warned that the administration may have to curb its so-called export enhancement program if the drought becomes even worse.
Clearly, we will have to appraise very carefully the desirability of using export enhancement funds at a time when (U.S.) supplies are unpredictable," Mr. Yeutter said.
Shrinking soybean stockpiles and soaring prices have stirred speculation that the government may impose an embargo on exports of soybeans and soybean products.
Farm equipment makers say they are concerned that sales could suffer.
"This is probably putting a damper on one of the most optimistic years in the last eight years," says Richard Hahn, president and chief executive of an Omaha, Neb.-based farm management concern.
Tractor sales by farm equipment dealers were up 12.8% during the first five months of the year.
Now, with farmers in many Midwest states expecting smaller harvests this year, these businesses are seeing their new-found trade evaporating.
"People are borrowing minimal amounts."
But all bets are off on how farmers will fare at the end of this year's harvests.
While crop prices are soaring on weather-worries, yields may be so low in many areas that farmers won't do nearly as well as expected.
If farmers are strapped for cash this year, the effects would ripple throughout the farm economy.
Bob Pfiefer, owner of a Massey-Ferguson farm equipment dealership in Sioux Falls, S.D., says he has already canceled some orders for fear that sales will soon begin dropping off.
If the drought continues, he says, "it could bring us to our knees again."
"It's already getting harder to sell farmers tractors because of the drought," says James K. Ashford, Case president and chief executive officer.
He said that if the drought continues, industrywide tractor sales could turn flat next year instead of climbing the 5% to 6% that was originally forecast for 1989.
Before the drought we expected a very solid year" for farm lenders, says Mark Drabenstott, an economist at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
One of the biggest problems for farm banks has been that their number of loans, a major source of bank income, has shriveled as farmers paid off their debts with last year's profits.
In Anadarko, Okla., bankers worry now that ranchers are going to make less money this year because crop damage is escalating the cost of feeding cattle. "
The drought is going to hurt us because it hurts the cattle market," says Lance Shenold, a vice president of Anadarko Bank &amp; Trust Co.
The land boom is wilting.
Because of the drought, Iowa realtors expect land prices to rise somewhat less than the 5% to 10% they had been expecting.
A big drop in harvests this year could squeeze investors who had planned on good yields to help pay their real estate loans.
"I will be hurt a bit," says Mark Dadd, an economist who is buying a 420-acre farm in Missouri.
He is hoping that drought damage and rising crop prices will fan inflationary fears so high that land again will be a hot commodity.
"I'm here for the capital gain over the long haul," he says.
Paul Prentice of Farm Sector Economics Associates, a forecasting concern, thinks the drought could so deplete U.S. stockpiles that the Agriculture Department would drop much of its farm crisis-era planting restrictions.
"Both borrowers and lenders have developed pretty good memories."
The decision by Mr. Lyng, the secretary of agriculture, to allow hay-mowing for 30 days on Conservation Reserve Program land came as farmers and ranchers in North Dakota, Minnesota and other states continued to sell off livestock in response to shortages of hay and other forage crops.
Mr. Lyng's order covers counties where livestock-grazing and hay-mowing on so-called set-aside acres already has been authorized, and the drought's effects have been rated as "severe."
