Introduction:   Lightning has set the West ablaze thissummer, and electricity is again surging through the nation'swildfire command post.
``The whole place is running at the max, full out,'' Reed Jarvisof the Boise Interagency Fire Center said last week.
But this year is different because the center's strategists andquartermasters who direct the nation's wildfire battles can seesome of the worst blazes from their windows.
As nearly half the acreage afire burns within 150 miles,specialists in the logistics center marshal resources from aroundthe nation.
she says over her shoulder.
``He spellshis name B-L-O-U-G-H.'' Others juggle as many as three of the constantly ringing phones,scanning computer terminals for personnel, airplanes, red chemicalretardant and gear.
``We drop slimy red mud on burning trees from antiqueairplanes,'' declares the slogan on one T-shirt.
In one leg of the L-shaped logistics room, the intelligencedivision keeps track of fires around the country.
The other findsthe crews and equipment to attack the flames.
``But the support people aredealing with human life facing fire, which is inherentlydangerous.''
Hundreds of fires burned fitfully in the Idaho backcountry fordays after the last ``lightning bust.''
One storm laid down 2,000strikes an hour with little rain.
Then winds reaching 80 mph andtemperatures pushing triple digits whipped those spots into majorconflagrations.
Three-inch-thick burning branches blew up to two miles ahead ofthe main fires.
Flames swept over thousands of acres in severalhours' time, creating a smoky miasma around Idaho's capital city.
``Fortunately we don't work at this level all year,'' Hartigansaid.
National Guard troopsin camouflage fatigues march toward trucks for transportation tothe fire lines.
Smoke jumpers sit in the shade of a buildingwaiting for their next leap into 100-foot-tall ponderosa pines,laden with chainsaws or water pumps.
``We are definitely an assault organization,'' Hartigan said.``It's patterned after military operations because they work.
We'rethe supply lines for the troops.''
The requests are for airplanes, helicopters, axes and shovels,portable marine pumps, hoses, fresh fruit, disposable sleepingbags, soft drinks and, most important, manpower.
World War II Navy bombers _ PB-4Y2s and Neptunes _ are lined upon the flight deck, spattered with red retardant.
Then the craftroar aloft toward the smoky mountains to the north.
After five dry summers, backcountry timber has a moisturecontent only slightly higher than kiln-dried lumber, andstrategists have settled in for a long campaign.
Until then, the lights will be on at the FireCenter, and the pace will be frenetic.
