Domestically, the move reflects the competitive advantage that regional banks with large loan-loss reserves have over their big brothers in such money centers as New York, Chicago and San Francisco.
U.S. banks are increasingly splitting into two groups.
On the other hand is a group of regional institutions which, with relatively small exposure to developing countries, are willing to establish big reserves against such loans or, as Bank of Boston decided Monday, to completely write off some loans as uncollectible.
"It's a parting of the ways between the money centers who are out to collect on their assets and the regionals who want to get out," says Lawrence Cohn, an analyst at Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The reserve action also could make it easier for institutions like Bank of Boston to attract investors to their stock and other securities, bank analysts said.
While the large banks are eager to remain competitive with such regionals as Bank of Boston, they also want to ensure that the regionals continue to lend to heavily indebted developing nations.
That could add to the lending burden for the biggest U.S. banks.
For instance, if Manufacturers Hanover Corp. imitated Bank of Boston's action, it would have to add $3.13 billion to reserves and would have a common assets ratio of only 0.69%, Keefe Bruyette estimates.
Manufacturers Hanover declined to comment on whether it might follow Bank of Boston's action.
Mellon Bank Corp. said yesterday that it expects a fourth-quarter loss of about $220 million, and that it would increase loan-loss reserves by about $180 million to cover troubled foreign loans.
The stocks of several major money-center banks fell sharply yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Chase Manhattan skidded $2.25 to close at $20.125, Manufacturers Hanover fell $2.375 to $24.25, and J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. was off $1.50 to $30.
Analysts expect that other regional banks may copy the action taken by Bank of Boston.
Bank of Boston announced Monday that it was writing off $200 million of loans to less-developed countries and that it was placing all but a small portion of its loans to the Third World on a non-accrual basis.
Bank of Boston also placed on non-accrual $470 million in loans to less-developed countries that are unrelated to trade.
Along with $330 million in such loans previously put on non-accrual, Bank of Boston has now either charged off, or put on non-accrual, all of its $1 billion loans to heavily indebted developing countries.
This doesn't include $170 million in trade-related debt.
While Bank of Boston's action is the most striking to date to remove Latin exposure from its balance sheet, smaller similar actions began at other banks around mid-year.
First Bank System Inc., Minneapolis, the nation's 15th biggest banking concern, charged off $25.4 million in troubled foreign loans during the third quarter.
First Chicago Corp., the 11th largest banking concern, charged off $48.9 million in Third World loans during the quarter.
And even before the big reserves were set aside, banks were quietly charging off Latin debt, though on a smaller scale.
