In this investigative report AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI reveals the details of this network, the secret meetings it held in Tehran, Amsterdam, and Beirut, the names of those who planned and carried out the assassination, the centers where they were trained, their affiliations, and how this leads to exposing dangerous secrets which made the Abu-Nidal group send threat letters to those in charge of the investigation.
A few days ago, Palestinian Ahmad Mahmud 'Abd-al-Karim, a prominent FRC official, arrived in Lebanon from Finland on the special mission of following up the investigations the Lebanese authorities are conducting with the Palestinians from the Abu-Nidal group who are accused of the assassination of Jordanian First Secretary Na'ib al-Ma'ayitah in Beirut on 29 January.
Reports confirm that shortly after arriving in Beirut, Ahmad 'Abd-al-Karim left for the FRC's al-Rawdah camps in Western al-Biqa' from where he followed the investigation through reports sent to him by people who secretly work for the FRC and who provided him with information in exchange for generous sums of money.
At the same time, AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI has learned that the Abu- Nidal group recently sent threat letters to Lebanese officials who are currently investigating its members who are involved in the al- Ma'ayitah assassination.
Reports mention that the first steps in the investigation have revealed that the FRC planned and carried out the assassination in coordination with the Jordanian fundamentalist Islamic Mobilization Youth Organization [IMYO] which is financed by Iran.
The IMYO was exposed in Jordan by Jordanian authorities on 17 August 1992 when the Jordanian security bodies confiscated weapons and ammunition the organization had been hiding in Jordan to be used to destablize the regime and security in the country.
During the trials, this organization tried to claim that the weapons found by the authorities were temporarily hidden in Jordan but were to be smuggled into the occupied territories and given to the Palestinian strugglers there to enhance their ability to confront the Zionist forces and carry out military operations against them.
The IMYO also claimed that the weapons that were found were not brought in from any neighboring country but were purchased on the local market.
The security information the investigators have collected on the al-Ma'ayitah assassination shows that as soon as the IMYO was exposed, Jordanian fundamentalist elements belonging to various organizations such as Muhammad's Army, the Islamic Liberation Army, and the IMYO and others moved to neighboring Arab countries.
Since that time, Iran exploited the elements from these fundamentalist organizations and established the Jordan office in the Liberation Movement's office.
Ayatollah Shakhiry [name as transliterated], the official in charge of the Jordan section in the Iranian intelligence organ, took charge of this office.
The official in charge of the Jordanian elements was Shakir Abu-Jami', a Jordanian national wanted by authorities in his country and one of the most prominent members of the Jordanian fundamentalist Muhammad Army Organization.
Iran managed to recruit FRC members to work in the Jordanian fundamentalist extremist organizations by taking advantage of the hostility the Abu-Nidal group has harbored against Jordan and its regime and king ever since the group was expelled from the country.
The information confirms that Abu-Nidal group's leadership agreed to execute the mission for the aforesaid reasons, because of its commitment to the policy of extremism and rejection that aims at torpedoing the [peace] process, and because of its ties to Iran within the framework of international terrorism.
These meetings were conducted in the presence of an FRC official called Amjad 'Ata, a Lebanese member of Abu-Nidal group named Tha'ir, and a Jordanian IMYO official from the Idkaydik family.
But why did the Abu-Nidal group and the IMYO choose to assassinate Na'ib al-Ma'ayitah and not any other Jordanian official in the Beirut embassy.
To carry out the assassination, an intensive training course was conducted for the Palestinians Bassam 'Atiyah and Yusuf 'Adwani in a secret center run by Abu-Nidal group in Buq'atah in Lebanon's al- Shuf area under the supervision of a Palestinian expert in assassinations called A. al-'Umayri [not further identified].
Al- ' Umayri was implicated in the assassination of the FRC official Bahij Abu-al-Hana in July 1992 in Lebanon's al-Biqa' area, after he accused him of contacting the 'Arafat-led Fatah movement.
Confirmed security information says a Jordanian fundamentalist took part in the assassination of al-Ma'ayitah.
The man is called Khalid al-Bishtawi, 34 years old.
It is worth noting that the Jordanian intelligence service played an important role in revealing the secrets and details of al- Ma'ayitah's assassination.
Jordanian security officials traveled to Lebanon and cooperated with Lebanese officers in the investigations that led to revealing all the details and the arrest of more than 30 members of Abu-Nidal group in Jordan.
It seems that the investigations will not stop at this point in Beirut or Amman.
In an apparent attempt to prevent the revelation of further details, the leadership of the Abu-Nidal group urged King Husayn to "give it a chance to explain its position."
It also hastened to send one of its officials to Lebanon to follow the investigation and try to lessen its repercussions out of fear that al-Ma'ayitah's assassination may be one of the fatal mistakes committed by the FRC and may negatively affect the organization's future in Lebanon and Jordan.
