Introduction:   Millions of gallons of crude oil thatspilled when a tanker ran aground spread across a wildlife-richstretch of ocean Saturday, and Alaska's chief environmental officercriticized cleanup efforts as too slow.
The biggest oil spill in U.S. history created a slick aboutseven miles long and seven miles wide in Prince William Sound.
Some 240,000 barrels _ about 10,080,000 gallons _ of crude oilfrom Alaska's North Slope spilled early Friday when the 987-foottanker Exxon Valdez ran hard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 milesoutside Valdez, where it had taken on a total cargo of 1.2 millionbarrels.
Initial reports indicated 270,000 barrels had spilled.
``It is an enclosed body of water,'' he said.
``And during that transit, undoubtedly a large stretch ofshoreline will be contaminated,'' he said.
Divers Saturday said they had found six to eight holes in thevessel's hull large enough to swim through, said Frank Iarossi,president of Exxon Shipping Co. About 30 feet of the vessel isresting on a shelf on the reef.
Efforts to begin pumping 200,000 gallons of oil off the ExxonValdez onto another tanker, the Exxon Baton Rouge, were haltedearly Saturday when authorities noticed that oil appeared toleaking as the pumping operation proceeded.
``If it'snot ... you endanger the stability of the vessel.''
He also said four members of the Coast Guard's Pacific StrikeTeam from San Francisco, specially trained to deal with pollutionand oil spills, arrived Saturday and were helping to rig pumps andassemble equipment needed to transfer oil to the Baton Rouge.
Kelso was highly critical of what he said was a slow response tothe spill.
Kelso said the efforts shouldhave been under way in five hours, but took much longer.
Alyeska spokesman Chuck O'Donnel said he was satisfied with hiscompany's actions.
``I think our people did an excellent job,'' hesaid.
The spill's effect on wildlife had not yet been assessed, butcommercial fishermen who depend on the sound for a catch worthmillions of dollars were outraged and said a key herring spawningarea had been polluted.
``The whole food chain could be affected by the spill,'' saidAlan Reichman, ocean ecology coordinator for the environmentalgroup Greenpeace, in Seattle.
An animal cleanup station was set up in a building at thecommunity college in Valdez, but volunteers there said they had noanimals to work on by midafternoon.
The response to the spill also drew fire from the 12,000-memberUnited Fishermen of Alaska.
She noted that the spill hadoccurred in a protected area close to the Valdez marine terminaland the water was calm.
Ott said the spill had polluted Prince William Sound's primaryherring spawning area.
Fishermen also take salmon and shellfishfrom the sound.
Last year, they were paid about $85 million fortheir catches, she said.
The Coast Guard said the Exxon Valdez struck the reef when itmaneuvered outside normal tanker traffic lanes to avoid icebergs.
It was unclear if a pilotwas aboard the Exxon Valdez when it grounded.
Coast Guard Cmdr.
Steven McCall said National TransportationSafety Board investigators are expected to arrive Sunday to takeover the accident probe.
The Coast Guard issued a statement late Saturday that McCall hassubpoenaed the ship's master and two crew members.
Previously, the largest U.S. tanker spill was the Dec. 15, 1976,grounding of the Argo Merchant tanker off the Nantucket shoals offMassachusetts, in which 7.6 million gallons of oil spilled, Golobsaid.
However, that oil burned as well as spilled.
