Meanwhile, Exxon said placing an oil-catching boom around theship immediately after the grounding could have touched off a giantexplosion of gases from the oil, although that was not the reasonit took 11 hours to set the first containment line.
We would have lost the vessel,'' said Exxon ShippingCo.
President Frank Iarossi.
A boom wasn't placed around the vessel for 11 hours because itwasn't available in Valdez, Exxon officials have said.
Iarossi also said Exxon has changed its policy because of thespill and now requires crews to be aboard ship, where drinking isprohibited, four hours before sailing.
Thousands of animals are known dead,including 30 sea otters.
Early Tuesday, Exxon said it had finished transferring about 42million gallons of crude to three other ships.
Another 42 milliongallons of oily waste water remained aboard the Valdez, whichspilled more than 10 million gallons of crude into Prince WilliamSound when it struck a reef March 24.
Exxon then planned to take the ship to a port in the Far East,or to a Portland, Ore., dry dock.
``We're not willing to trade in the environment for jobs,''Portland port spokesman Darrel Buttice said Monday.
Neil Goldschmidt said Tuesday there are ``a lot ofquestions that need to be answered'' before the Valdez is allowedin.
Canadian authorities also asked Exxon for assurances there willbe no damage to the British Columbia coast if the tanker is towedto Oregon, and the mayor of Valdez said the ship was not welcomeback in the port where it took on the load of crude.
``We will take apart the environmentalplanning for every aspect of oil development in Alaska and in othersensitive areas where the environment potentially could bethreatened,'' he told a House appropriations subcommittee.
The family of the fired Exxon Valdez captain, Joseph Hazelwood,said the skipper wants to surrender but is awaiting advice from hisattorney, according to Lt. Thomas Fazio, commander of the New YorkState Police on Long Island.
Hazelwood, 42, is accused operating the ship while under theinfluence of alcohol, reckless endangerment and negligent dischargeof oil.
Six otters were flown to SeaWorld in San Diego on Monday for rehabilitation.
Sablefish and shrimp fisheries in Prince Williamwaters also have been closed.
An effort at Sawmill Bay, 11 miles west of Valdez, to keep oilaway from a hatchery where 2 million salmon are waiting to bereleased to the sea appeared to be failing.
The spill has shifted public opinion in Alaska about the energyindustry, which has been lobbying for new exploration.
At the first Valdez City Council meeting since the spill, twocouncil members and Mayor John Devens expressed concern that angerand frustration over the spill was surfacing as harrassment ofpipeline company workers and their children.
