Linking England and France, the tunnel symbolizes the growingunification of Europe.
It also fulfills a dream of Napoleon, whowanted to send his armies through the tunnel to conquer Britain.
Despite her countrymen's fears of losing their ancient moatagainst Europe, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher describedthe breakthrough as ``a very exciting moment.''
``It is an example of what Europe is about,'' she said inLondon.
In London, the conservative Daily Express newspaper noted todaythat Britons will be able to walk to France for the first timesince the Ice Age.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' a construction unionofficial in Calais said.
Threading a spinning probe the width of agarden hose through 100 yards of chalk under the Channel bears thefirst tangible fruit in three years of drilling.
Champagne corks popped and workers danced jigs after Frenchdrillers phoned news of the probe's arrival to their Britishcounterparts.
Technicians will be more certain Wednesday, but theycalled the rough line-up ``exceptional.''
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole.
Tunnelers areexpected to walk through and greet each other with handshakes in afew weeks.
The tunneling machine on the French side will then guide itselfby laser toward the British machine, ensuring perfect alignment.
The linkup came on the maintenance tunnel, the smallest of threetunnels being dug.
Eight workers suffered injures, two seriously, about 90 minutesafter Tuesday's linkup when a tractor rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
Since the tunnel construction began in 1987 there have beenseven accidental deaths on the British side and two on the Frenchside.
The tunnel's cost has soared from an initial estimate of $9.4billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion in caseof unforeseen cost overruns.
Whhen its work is done, the drilling machine on the French sidewill be hauled out in pieces.
The one on the British side will diga side passage, and be buried in cement.
Officials say it is toocostly to extricate the machine.
The tunnel starts a few miles inland on each side, accountingfor its total length of 31 miles.
Eurotunnel PLC announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreementwith its banks on $3.5 billion in new credit.
Officials estimate the tunnel trains may carry 28 millionpassengers in the first year of operation.
