Abimael Guzman, founder of the rebel movement, has said of theslums and their people: ``The immense masses of the shantytowns arelike belts of steel that lock in the enemy and hold back hisreactionary forces.''
His Maoist rebels, once secretive fanatics, are becoming apolitical force that seeks public support in Huaycan and the othermakeshift communities where two-thirds of Lima's 7 million peoplescrape along.
Their huts built of strawmats line the bone-dry slopes of the Andean foothills 15 miles eastof downtown Lima.
Most residents are poor migrants from the violent highlands wherethe rebel movement was born.
They make ideal recruits for theShining Path _ Sendero Luminoso in Spanish.
In the countryside, they make ever-bolder attacks on themilitary.
Rebel columns strike along the spine of the Andes from theEcuadorean frontier in the north to Bolivia in the south.
Theguerrillas also work with drug traffickers in Peru's eastern jungle,source of the raw material for much of the world's cocaine, and buysophisticated weapons with the profits.
More than 12,000 people have been killed in the civil war, mostof them Andean peasants slain by rebels or security forces, andofficial figures put damage to the shattered economy at $10 billion.
``Political violence in Peru is not the result of poverty alonebut of humiliation, oppression, hate between classes, racism,'' Sen. Enrique Bernales, chairman of a committee on violence, said when itreleased a report in September.
The most striking development of the last 18 months has been theShining Path's move into public view in this grimy capital on SouthAmerica's Pacific coast.
Rebels organize support groups in the slums, infiltrate laborunions, organize marches, spread their message of revolution withthe aid of a sympathetic daily newspaper and agitate amonguniversity students.
Analysts and experts on counterinsurgency say Shining Pathappears bent on dominating the radical left of legal politics.
Officials have become alarmed by the broadening of tactics toinclude infiltration of legitimate organizations, including unionsof government workers.
``Sendero is seeking semi-legal status as a way of winningmilitants and sympathizers, while at the same time generating aconfusing situation in which the security forces indiscrimatelyrepress members of the legal left along with leftist insurgents,'' aranking police official said privately.
Guzman, a Marxist philosophy professor, founded Sendero Luminosoin 1970 in Ayacucho, an Andean state capital 230 miles southeast ofLima where he had built a following at the University of Huamanga.
Followers call Guzman, 54, ``the fourth sword of Marxism'' afterMarx, Lenin and Mao.
His movement, a splinter group of the Communist Party, gatheredstrength in Indian communities of the southern Andes for 10 yearsbefore launching its guerrilla war.
Guzman's guerrillas have followed tens of thousands of peasantsfrom the Andes into Lima's shantytowns and see the slums as a newstronghold.
In July, the pro-Shining Path newspaper El Diario published a48-page report on the guerrilla movement.
Wemust prepare for the insurrection that is coming, which means thetaking of the cities.''
He said conditions were ripe for the next stage in the strugglefor power: inciting a coup against President Alan Garcia byprovoking economic chaos and increasing attacks on the army.
I have been in a shantytown where there is aShining Path group, and the police are doing nothing about it.''
Huaycan is one of the slums where Shining Path works hardestbecause it is just off the Central Highway, a strategic routethrough the capital's main industrial zone to the mountains.
Guerrillas killed three plant managers in 1988 who were involvedin labor disputes.
