Allthat after five years of drought parched the landscape.
"Right now the rains have caused everything to green up, but that canchange in a few weeks," Lisa Boyd, a spokeswoman for the California Departmentof Forestry and Fire Protection in Sacramento, said Monday.
"The state'sreally a tinderbox this year.
Everyone's going to have to be extra careful."
But the county's wild landsare littered with heavy fuel -- brush and trees -- killed by the drought orthe December freeze.
Particularlyvulnerable are the eucalyptus groves that did not survive the freeze, Mauldinsaid. "
State forestry officials estimate 10 milliontrees -- Boyd called them "standing kindling" -- have died in California'swooded areas since the drought began.
California's worst fire year was1987, when 900,000 acres burned.
"We preach every year for homeowners to take precautions(such as clearing brush from around their houses), and a lot of people don'tdo it," Mauldin said.
"They think 'it's never going to happen to me,' and whenit does they start pointing fingers.
"Mauldin said the Morgan Hill rangerunit will begin manning some of its seasonal stations Monday, begin hiringsummer season firefighters June 3, and have all of the back-country stationsopened by July 1.The Morgan Hill unit covers parts of Santa Clara,Alameda, Contra Costa, Stanislaus, San Joaquin and Merced counties.
"We don't want to say this is the worst fire season in X years, but weare gearing up for it," said Ned MacKay, spokesman for the East Bay RegionalPark District.
"We have to be prepared.
"Every year the droughtcontinues, the conditions get more explosive, but we can't say for sure whatis going to happen this year," Boyd said.
California doesn't face the fire threat alone.
Wildfireprecautions; The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection advisesresidents of rural areas to take special precautions to protect their homesfrom wildfires this summer:; Clear at least a 30-foot defensible space ofbrush and dry grass around your house.
Remove all pine needles and leaves from your roof, eaves andrain gutters.
Install a sparkarrester on your chimney.
Further information can beobtained from the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection's fireprevention unit in Morgan Hill, (408) 779-2121.Source: California Departmentof Forestry and Fire Protection  
