Introduction: Egypt honored its slain parliament speakerand four security men today with a state funeral led by agrim-looking President Hosni Mubarak.
The government said Iraqi agents or Egyptian Moslemfundamentalists were to blame for the assassination Friday of itssecond-highest official, Rifaat el-Mahgoub.
He said the perpetrators possibly belonged to thePalestinian extremist faction led by Abu Nidal.
They also lined the funeral processionroute, as did hundreds of plainclothes security men.
Symbolic units from the military services spearheaded theprocession, followed by a military band and two dozenwreath-bearers.
A caisson bearing el-Mahgoub's coffin followed, also wrapped inthe flag.
It was drawn by three pairs of black horses.
Immediately behindcame two officers carrying el-Mahgoub's decorations laid onblack-velvet cushions.
The procession began from the mosque and stopped about 1,500feet away.
Relatives of the dead then lined up to acceptcondolences from Mubarak and other mourners.
Interior Minister Abdel-Halim Moussa had warned days earlier ofsuch an attack.
Saddam has called Egypt a traitor to the Arab cause for sendingits troops to back the U.S. military buildup in the gulf inresponse to the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
The state-owned newspaper Al-Ahram, quoting police sources,reported Monday that local Moslem extremists were collaboratingwith Palestinian terrorists sent to the country by Iraq on sabotagemissions.
It said the extremists had provided weapons and explosives tofive Palestinians from Abu Nidal's faction of the PalestineLiberation Organization.
El-Mahgoub's authority extended solely over the 458-seatParliament, which he had headed since 1984.
``In fact he was assassinated because he was a prominentEgyptian politician.
The assasins wanted to tell their terroristbosses that they pierced the stability of Egypt,'' the newspapersaid.
``We certainly deplore these kinds of terrorist activities andassassination is the most vile kind of terrorism.
