Yesterday, under artillery firefrom the federal army, they waved a white flag andsurrendered as Yugoslavia lurched closer to civil war.
Less than two days after Slovenia and Croatia, two ofYugoslavia's six republics, unilaterally seceded from thenation, the federal government in Belgrade mobilized troopsto regain control.
They surrounded the airport near Ljubljana, Slovenia'scapital, and retook Slovenia's main border crossings withAustria, Italy and Hungary, effectively cutting offinternational traffic.
Local militiamen shot down a federalarmy helicopter as it flew over the capital, killing thepilot and co-pilot, the Associated Press reported.
To put it briefly, Slovenia is at war," he said.
Outside the Slovene capital, governmentarmored vehicles smashed through barricades and road blocks,leaving a trail of twisted metal, flattened cars andshattered glass.
Four people hadbeen killed and 14 hurt Wednesday.
The first shooting between the federal army and themilitias occurred here, in the mountains that mark the borderwith Austria.
Throughout the morning, federal soldiers, somebearing bazookas, fanned out in the woods surrounding theSlovenia customs house.
In midafternoon, the customshouse was rattled with a burst of rifle fire and a fewminutes later it was rocked by three projectiles fromanti-tank guns.
Here, the drama was watched by several Yugoslavstrying to return to their country from Austria; the cooks,waitresses and a few guests at restaurants on both sides ofthe border; several tourists who were caught on the Yugoslavside; and a dozen Austrian customs officers and policemen.
No spectators were harmed.
After the shooting stopped, he talked to a group ofthe federal soldiers, and discovered that some wereconscripts from Slovenia. "
This is what we have come to," hesaid. "
Slovenes shooting at Slovenes.
Then he turned serious, scoffing, "Someindependence.
"Emil Herlec, a leader of the local Slovene mountain rescueteam, scrambled up the mountain, through the woods, when heheard the shooting. "
The first shots that have been fired inSlovenia since after World War II," he said.
"If we want ourfreedom, we will now have to defend it.
"In Ljubljana, Milan Kucan, Slovenia's president, vowed ina television address that the republic's militia wouldrespond with "all methods" to any aggression against his"independent state."
In Croatia,officials also vowed to defend their sovereignty.
But the poorly trained and equipped Slovene and Croatianmilitias, formed in the past several months, are no match forthe 180,000-strong federal army.
The local militias also havenothing to counter the central government's several thousandtanks and other armored vehicles, not to mention thegovernment's air forces.
Politically, the two republics' declarations ofindependence have been ignored by the rest of the world,which supports a united Yugoslavia.
On the contrary, the European Community and theU.S.
But U.S. Secretary of State James Baker appealed toBelgrade to find a way for Croatia and Slovenia to expresstheir "national aspirations" through "negotiations anddialogue" rather than bloodshed.
And onTuesday night, after the two republics declared theirindependence, the federal parliament called on the army tointervene.
They worry that the600,000 Serbs living in Croatia (about 11% of that republic'spopulation) will be discriminated against by the Croatiangovernment.
