Introduction:   Britain and France were linked beneath theEnglish Channel on Tuesday when workers used a two-inch probe toconnect two halves of a 31-mile undersea rail tunnel, officialsreported.
``It is an example of what Europe is about,'' British PrimeMinister Margaret Thatcher said in London.
The linkup fulfills a dream by Napoleon in 1802, who thought hecould defeat the English by connecting Britain to Europe with aland passage.
The Chunnel is scheduled for completion in June 1993.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' said a construction unionofficial.
Eight workers suffered injuries, two seriously, about 90 minuteslater when a tractor towing supplies rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
The basic goal of the Channel Tunnel project is to enablepassengers to travel between London and Paris in about three hours.
That time is comparable to flying, if transport to and fromairports is included, and is half the time of a car-ferry journey.
The cost of the project has soared from an initial estimate of$9.4 billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion forunforeseen cost overruns.
The tunnel starts a few miles inland on each side, accountingfor its total length of 31 miles.
French workers reaching the tiny hole telephoned their Britishcounterparts and relayed the news to TransManche officials.
Thefirst champagne corks popped minutes later.
It's the first time we have airpassing between the two tunnels,'' said Gordon Crighton, tunnelengineering manager.
Another day will be needed to be certain, technicianssaid, but they called the line-up ``exceptional,'' considering themassive boring machines are drilling holes about three storieshigh.
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole to permit passagefrom one half to the other.
Two Japanese-designed boring machines are drilling the tunnel.
After it is finished, one will be dismantled and hauled out inpieces.
The other will drill its own grave and be buried in cementbecause French officials said it will be too costly to extricateit.
The Chunnel actually consists of three tunnels - two for railwaytrains and a smaller maintenance tunnel between them.
President Francois Mitterrand and Mrs. Thatcher are expected tomeet each other in the tunnel Jan. 26, after the digging for muchof the tunnel is finished.
Officials estimate the tunnel may carry 28 million passengers inthe first year of operation, although Eurotunnel doesn't expect aprofit until the end of the century.
Since construction began in late 1987, there have been sevendeaths on the British side and two on the French.
Five Britishfirms were ordered last Wednesday to stand trial on charges relatedto the death of a construction worker last year.
The undersea bond between the two hereditary enemies wasenvisioned nearly 200 years ago by a French engineer called AlbertMathieu.
