But even as Memphians whoop it up, the prediction that theBig One may come in December is triggering tremors up anddown the Mississippi Valley.
Shaken, thousands of people arecrowding into earthquake survival classes.
In Arnold, Mo.,3,000 people showed up for one course.
In Missouri and Arkansas, some schools and businesses haveannounced plans to close in early December.
Some people are planning to flee.
, who will take her two youngsters and spend several dayswith relatives in North Carolina. "
But it seems stupid tostay on a fault line with a prediction like this.
But the Midwest actually has had three of the most powerfulearthquakes on this continent.
In 1811 and 1812, along a120-mile zig-zag formation called the New Madrid fault, aseries of quakes ravaged the Midwest.
Chimneys crumbledin Cincinnati.
In the next 10years, experts warn, the area has a 33% chance of a quakemeasuring 7.1.
"We're overdue for one inthe 6s and low 7s," says David Stewart, an earthquake expertat Southeast Missouri State University.
Over the years, a few pinpoint-on-the map towns have triedto capitalize on the little-known fault.
That's because the predictor hasgained credibility in some important circles for his work onthe climate.
He has clients, such as PaineWebber Inc., who have long paidfor his wisdom on how the weather will affect theiragricultural investments.
Since 1971, Mr. Browning says, he has picked the correctdates of four large earthquakes, two volcanoes -- and one daywith both a volcano and an earthquake.
Mr. Browning says that will exertpressure that could trigger faults already ripe to fail.
The New Madrid area has a 50-50 chance of producing atleast a 7 quake on Dec. 3, give or take a day or two oneither side, Mr. Browning says.
At that time, a similar quakehas a lesser chance of occurring on California's San Andreasor Hayward faults, according to Mr. Browning, and an 8.2quake in Tokyo has a greater chance.
Skepticism abounds.
He has a methodology that candetermine, plus or minus a window of a day or two, anenhanced probability of a volcano or an earthquake in certainlatitudes," says Mr. Stewart.
"No one else has been able toreplicate it, but that doesn't mean it's wrong."Mr.
But asked if he enjoys being right, he says, "It's the onlydamn thing that matters.
"Plenty of other business people are cashing in on hisprediction.
Insurance salespeople are peddling earthquakecoverage to homeowners and businesses.
One says, "I'm staying," the other, "I'mleaving.
"All of this has changed life in places like Blytheville,Ark.
So many people plan to skip town on Dec. 3 that theFlexible Technologies tubing plant already plans to shut downfor two days, at a cost of thousands of dollars.
For one recent class, he was in Osceola, Ark.
It is 9 a.m.on a rainy Saturday, and 325 Osceolans, gripping legal padsand spiral notebooks, fill the high school auditorium for anall-day session on earthquake preparedness.
With his boomingvoice, Mr. Edwards lays out a grim scenario: "One hundred andfifty thousand dead in Memphis instantly -- instantly.
Andall the federal emergency help is going to go there and St. Louis.
You have to be prepared to take complete care ofyourself for 24 hours to two weeks.
Fearing their home will be looted, Bess Mann,86 years old, wants to ride it out.
But her sister, HalliePeterson, 83, wants to stay with their nephew in Mississippi.
Scared that the big Memphis-Arkansas bridge that spans theMississippi River will collapse in a quake, she's charting analternate route two hours out of her way.
School districts in Earle and Wilson, Ark., have announcedclosings around Dec. 3.
In 11 years of studying predictionmethods, the panel has found no bona fide approach.
Browning says he is tentatively booked to give a talkin Minneapolis on Dec. 3 and he doesn't plan to go there viaSt.
That will kill more people than earthquakes.
