Introduction:The smoke has cleared a little.
After seven long years, the US Congress thisweek passed its first significant gun control law since the assassinationsof Mr Robert Kennedy and Rev Martin Luther King Jr in 1968.The legislation - known as the Brady bill after Mr James Brady, the formerWhite House press secretary severely wounded in an assassination attempt onPresident Ronald Reagan - would impose a five-day waiting period onpurchases of handguns.
It would give law enforcement authorities time tocheck the buyer's background.
Advocates of tougher controls on guns were jubilant about their victory overstubborn resistance by Republican senators from western states such as Idahoand Alaska, who have long opposed any restriction on gun ownership in theUS.The Brady bill's opponents in Congress say it will inconvenience onlylaw-abiding citizens, not criminals who buy or steal their weapons away fromthe government's prying eyes.
For instance, one newspaper reporter successfullyobtained a dealer's licence for his dog by submitting a made-up socialsecurity number.
Studies of state laws requiring some form of background check suggest,however, that at least some sales to convicted felons have been stopped, andsome suspected criminals have been caught when they tried to buy a gun.
But even the most ardent supporters of the Brady bill acknowledge that itwill make no more than a dent in the estimated 7.5m legal sales each year ofnew or used firearms, let alone the approximately 200m guns in circulation;and will barely affect the more than 14,000 murders and 1,400 accidentaldeaths involving guns each year.
'The longest journey begins with a single step,' Mr Brady said after thebill's final passage in the Senate on Wednesday.
Otherinitiatives in Congress and in state legislatures are under way: the Senatelast week agreed in a separate bill to ban assault weapons, a measurealready in force in California, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Virginia haspassed a law restricting people to one gun purchase a month.
This is prized by somegame hunters for its killing power but detested by emergency room doctorsfor the damage it inflicts on humans as it mushrooms on impact.
The fear of violent crimes such as carjackings and drive-by shootings hasspread even beyond the inner city and into the suburbs and the countryside,provoking a widespread feeling that something - anything - must be done.
The message from an outraged public is not, however, unequivocally in favourof gun control.
Paradoxically, while thousands of people have been telephoning theirRepublican senators to demand that they stop blocking the Brady bill,thousands have also been flocking to join the National Rifle Association,the leading organisation among the pro-gun lobbies.
In the past year and ahalf, it has gained 1,000 members a day to bring its total, which haddeclined to about 2.6m in 1991, to a record of about 3.3m.
Recent election results have shown, too, that simply being tough on guns isnot enough to woo the voters.
Although Democratic Governor Jim Florio of NewJersey came close to victory in the gubernatorial race this month bystriking a tougher stance on both guns and crime in general than hisRepublican challenger, Mrs Christine Todd Whitman, this was not enough.
''The second amendment is not about duck-hunting.
To many members, the right to self-defence is not just against muggers orburglars, but against a tyrannical government.
Such beliefs have led the NRA to campaign against restrictions on machineguns, assault weapons and armour-piercing bullets.
In the process they havelost touch with many of their members, who back gun control in general andspecifically the Brady bill.
