Introduction: A panel that investigated the Los Angeles Police Department after officerswere videotaped beating a motorist has decided not to seek Chief Daryl Gates'resignation and neither blamed nor cleared him.
But the 10-membercommission, which was to release its report today, found racist and sexistremarks scattered throughout 90,000 pages of computer messages, sources said.
A source speaking on the condition of anonymity said the panel report didnot focus on Gates -- who said he would resign if the commission agreed withhis critics that he created a climate within the department that condonedracism and brutality.
The report "deals with management issues, notdirectly with the chief of police," the source said.
Commission membersand others who had seen the report declined comment Monday.
Gates alsowouldn't comment.
In the days after theMarch 3 nightstick beating of Rodney G. King, the Police Department releasedtranscripts of computer messages that one of the officers at the scene sent toa another officer.
The transcripts contained a reference to an earlierincident involving black people, using the phrase "gorillas in the mist.
"At the same time, secret testimony by as many as a dozen black police officerstold of numerous instances of racial harassment within the ranks and theexistence of a double standard in the treatment of minority suspects.
Inone instance, officers said they found racial epithets spray-painted on thelockers inside police stations and concluded that other officers had put themthere.
"The officers testified before the commissionafter being assured that their identities would be kept confidential.
The commission, appointed by Gates and Bradley,held five public hearings, interviewed city leaders and reviewed more than 1million pages of documents during its three-month investigation.
Gates wasappointed by the Police Commission and cannot be fired by the mayor.
Geoffrey Taylor Gibbs, who sits on the board ofJohn M. Langston Bar Association, which represents about 900 African Americanlawyers, said black and Latino neighborhoods are depending on the commissionto confirm their view that the white, male-dominated Police Department hassubjected them to years of brutality and ignored their complaints.
