The U.N. agency, in its first comprehensive look at global tuberculosis in a decade, said the disease kills nearly 3 million people a year, most of them between the ages of 15 and 59, "the segment of the population that is economically most productive. "
"It is becoming a parallel epidemic, and it is this trend that has public health officials worried," Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, director general of WHO, said in a statement.
The agency estimated that between 15 million and 20 million adults will be infected with HIV by the year 2000, and it predicted that the number of cases and deaths from tuberculosis will rise sharply as a result, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America and Southeast Asia. "
These new data have been stunning to everyone, because an awful lot of people had thought that tuberculosis had gone away," said Dr. Barry Bloom, a professor of microbiology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York and a consultant to the United Nations.
There are about 8 million new cases of tuberculosis a year, according to the U.N. agency.
About half of these are infectious.
Also, an estimated 1.7 billion individuals worldwide carry the organism but are not infectious to others.
In these individuals, the organism can remain dormant without causing active disease for many years unless the immune system is somehow impaired.
An individual does not have to have a damaged immune system to contract an active case of tuberculosis.
This is what is happening in developing nations, where the AIDS epidemic is raging. "
But if they're not treated for tuberculosis, those people will be spreading the disease (tuberculosis) in their communities.
You don't have to have a depressed immune system to get tuberculosis."
This year, Bloom said, the number of cases of active tuberculosis in the United States is up nearly 5% over last year, with 23,495 new cases.
The overall incidence of tuberculosis in the United States is 9.5 cases per 100,000 population, he said.
In New York City, which has the highest number of AIDS cases in the nation, the incidence is 36 per 100,000, Bloom said.
