Introduction: Canadian Ben Johnson left the Olympicstoday ``in a complete state of shock,'' accused of cheating withdrugs in the world's fastest 100-meter dash and stripped of hisgold medal.
The prize went to American Carl Lewis.
Many athletes accepted the accusation that Johnson used amuscle-building but dangerous and illegal anabolic steroid calledstanozolol as confirmation of what they said they know has beengoing on in track and field.
Humanblood hormone, all kinds of drugs.
Itis just an itty-bitty drug.
Red-eyed and visibly distraught, Johnson's sister, Clare Rodneyin suburban Toronto, refused to believe the accusation.
``If you could cut him into a million pieces and test him overagain, my brother is not on drugs,'' she said.
In a middle-of-the-night meeting with Olympic and Canadianofficials, family members, coach and manager, Johnson, 26,forfeited his most prized possession, the medal he'd had in hishands for only three days.
He was just not able to speak and itwas a very difficult moment for all of us.''
A few hours later, he fled to the airport and boarded a plane toNew York's Kennedy International Airport.
Once there, he made hisway through a crush of reporters without comment as some spectatorsapplauded.
He took a limousine to LaGuardia Airport for a flight tohis Toronto home.
In Canada, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said the scandal was a``personal tragedy for Ben and his family.
It's also a moment ofgreat sorrow for all Canadians.''
James Worrall, a Canadian member of the IOC, said Johnson ``hasbeen killed'' as an athlete.
He said the sprinter's once-favoredstatus as a hero to many sports fans in Canada, his native Jamaica,and around the world now will be tarnished.
Johnson's name will go down in Olympic history with otherathletes who lost their gold medals, such as decathlete Jim Thorpein 1912 because he played semi-pro baseball and swimmer Rick DeMontin 1972 because he took an asthma medicine.
``Ben is a greatcompetitor and I hope he is able to straighten out his life andreturn to competition.''
