It was one of their best days ever.
Bonds issued by the besieged republic traded briskly andclimbed to records.
The price of vouchersto obtain foreign exchange jumped 10%, even though Slovenebanks had stopped issuing foreign currency.
Yesterday, with a tenuous peace settling over Slovenia,the exchange panicked.
Slovenia bonds slumped.
No one touchedthe stocks.
The foreign exchange rights went begging.
"Slovenes arenow beginning to see the costs of independence more clearlythan when we were at war.
"The two million people of this picturesque Alpine republicare waking up from their two-week nightmare sobered by theimplications of their intoxicating declaration of secessionfrom Yugoslavia on June 25.
Their bravado is undiminished,reflected in the almost unanimous feeling that there can beno going back now that blood has been spilled in defense ofindependence.
But there is also a growing unease about goingforward, because no one knows where Slovenia is headed.
Nationalismovershadows pragmatism, a quality that once distinguishedSlovenia from the rest of the often bewildering Balkans.
"We've decided to be our own country," says Mr. Veselinovic, "but we really don't know how we will executeit.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has heldup recent events here -- the Yugoslav army assault onSlovenia and the bitter ethnic clashes between Croats andSerbs -- as a warning to his land of what can happen whennationalism fractures a country.
"This shunning by Western Europe, and the U.S., isparticularly disillusioning for a people who enjoy theirBMWs, Peugeots and Fiats, their shopping trips to Munich andVenice and their vacation chalets in the Alps.
But as Slovenes measurethemselves with Western Europe, it is they who are the poorercousins.
"Okay, we must realize that we will be the less-developedpart of Europe," he says.
But Slovene economists reckon thatexports would have to double to match the performance ofother small European countries.
"It's yourability to engage in international trade that makes youviable.
"Finding new markets in the West is all the more urgentwith the certain decline in Slovenia's trade with the rest ofYugoslavia.
"Unbelievable," scoffs Mr. Skoberne as he reads a lettertelefaxed from the council of Banja Luka, a town with a largeSerbian population in the province of Bosnia-Hercegovina,decreeing that all Slovene-owned assets in the city are to beinventoried and frozen.
But this is only logical.
