Introduction:The Yugoslav army issued a "final ultimatum" to breakaway Slovenia on Saturdaynight to halt what it called continuing attacks against federal forces inSlovenia or face "decisive military action.
The independent television station Yutel quoted a federal officialas saying the government did not approve of the military statement.
Mesic election was keyMesic's election was the politicalkeystone in the peace plan, which also called for the federal troops inSlovenia to return to the barracks and for a three-month delay by thebreakaway republics of Slovenia and Croatia in carrying out their independencedeclarations.
Such a meetingmight have resolved the leadership vacuum in the federal government.
Preparations for hostilities were widespread.
Urgent legislative meetingSlovenia's parliament wascalled into emergency session after a 12-point list of demands from the armywas presented to republic leaders, insisting that all impediments to federalarmy operations be removed as part of a Western-brokered cease-fire.
But Saturday night Markoviccharged that Slovenia's President Milan Kucan had "torpedoed" the plan byinsisting that the moratorium on independence had to be approved by hisparliament to take effect.
At the end of the day, the maneuvering by allthree republics ensured a prolongation of the crisis that has deprived thecountry of a civilian commander in chief for more than six weeks andeffectively left the army to make its own moves.
'No wayback'"There is no way back from Slovenian independence," he told reportersin Ljubljana.
"I cannot foresee Slovenia becoming a part of Yugoslavia in ademocratic way.
"The Yugoslav army appeared to be beefing up its militarypresence in Slovenia, sending additional tanks across Croatia toward Sloveniaand dispatching two warships from Split, in Croatia, to the port of Koper, inSlovenia.
Casualties mountAtleast 40 people were killed in the first two days of fighting in Slovenia,including 20 federal army soldiers, four Slovenian fighters and 12 civilians,said Janez Jansa, the Slovenian defense minister.
He estimated that the tollmight actually be twice as high.
Croatian peasants, fearing a surprise attack, reportedly hid in the woods nearthe Slovenian border 50 miles north of the capital.
"Butif we are attacked, we will respond.
"Austria and Hungary sent armoredunits to the Slovenian border, describing the action as precautionary.
Thecrisis evoked further expressions of anguish from foreign leaders, and for thefirst time a high-placed U.S. official hinted that the administration may beweighing the possibility of recognizing Croatia and Slovenia. "
The presidentand the secretary (of state) have never said 'never,' " Deputy Secretary ofState Lawrence Eagleburger said in a television interview.
The StateDepartment said Saturday that U.S. dependents at its consulate in Zagreb,Croatia's capital, were being allowed to leave Yugoslavia.
The only other U.S.diplomatic post in Yugoslavia is in Belgrade, the federal capital.
