But there'snothing simple about it.
The Senate voted one answer and, in effect, invited the SupremeCourt to decide whether it was right or wrong.
That happened because in the arithmetic of congressionalreapportionment, every question becomes complex, contentious andpolitically charged.
The point at issue in Senate debate on a new immigration bill waswhether illegal aliens should be counted in the process that willreallocate House seats among states after the 1990 census.
Then again, the Census Bureau maintains that notincluding them, and still coming up with an accurate 1990 populationcount, would be even more difficult.
``A census of only legalresidents cannot be done as accurately as a census of allresidents,'' according to Census Bureau testimony to Congress.
After the 1980 census, the government estimated that there were2.57 million people in the United States illegally.
The Senate has passed an immigration billincluding an amendment that would cut illegal aliens from theredistricting numbers, but it is not likely to clear Congress beforethe next year's national head count.
Shelby's amendment says only that the secretary is to ``make suchadjustments in total population figures as may be necessary, usingsuch methods and procedures as the secretary determines feasible andappropriate'' to keep illegal aliens from being counted incongressional reapportionment.
That task would be perilous politically, since it would involvetaking House seats away from some states and giving them to others,all on the basis of estimates.
With 435 seats in the House, everyrepresentative gained by a state is a representative lost by another.
Opponents of the Shelby amendment, led by Sen. Edward M.
The Constitution itself says the apportionment of the House is tobe determined on the basis of ``the whole number of free persons,''excluding Indians and counting every five slaves as three persons.
Neither the original article nor the amendment mentionscitizenship in connection with apportionment, although the term``citizens'' is used in some other provisions.
Opponents of theamendment said that showed the authors of both documents wantedeverybody counted for purposes of apportionment.
He said it is unfair tocount illegal aliens in reapportionment.
``It just does not make anysense,'' Dole said.
But opponents of the Shelby measure said apportionment doesn'tinvolve who votes and who doesn't.
Women couldn't vote when theConstitution and the 14th Amendment were adopted, but they alwayswere counted.
The amendment was adopted after the Senate voted 58 to 41 againsta move to reject it, and 56 to 43 against scuttling it asunconstitutional.
End Adv PM Thurs July 20
