``We hope Mother Nature cooperates with us,'' said Mary Plumb ofthe federal Bureau of Land Management in Utah.
Record highs included 97 at Cheyenne, Wyo., and 100 at Denver,while Casper, Wyo., tied its record of 100.
Fire crews were at work in Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico,Arizona, California and Washington.
Elsewhere, four big fires burnedin interior Alaska, one having charred an estimated 24,000 acres.
The Boise Interagency Fire Center in Idaho, which coordinatesfederal firefighting efforts, listed 7,000 to 7,500 people on thefire lines, along with 42 air tankers, 14 guide planes and 10helicopters, spokesman Arnold Hartigan said Saturday.
The largest fire in the Lower 48 states was the week-old DiamondPeak fire in Utah, which had burned 12,200 acres of forest and brushin an area 20 miles west of the Utah-Colorado border, just north ofInterstate 70.
It was 80 percent contained, but after a week of temperaturesaround 100 degrees, the National Weather Service predicted possibledry lightning storms and gusting wind.
ForestService spokeswoman Cece Stewart said three helicopters scatteredincendiary bombs made of chemically treated plastic balls on anunburned 200-acre area between fire lines and the main fire in aneffort to stop the fire's advance.
High wind also was expected in northern California, where a2,500-acre fire near Janesville on the eastern slopes of the SierraNevada destroyed two mobile homes.
U.S. 395 between Milford andJanesville was closed.
It just blew the fire and pushed itout,'' said Forest Service spokesman Dave Reider.
Itwas unknown how many people were affected.
Spokesman Larry Lathrop said a helicopter battling the firecrashed Saturday about four miles southeast of Janesville.
In the Sierra foothills near Oroville, north of Sacramento, a750-acre fire was contained Saturday after burning four homes, sixoutbuildings and six vehicles, and forcing about 150 residents toflee briefly Friday night, according to the California Department ofForestry.
In the Bridger-Teton National Forest in western Wyoming, a firehad grown to 3,420 acres, burning an additional 1,000 acres in 24hours, according to forest officials.
Arizona's largest fire until Saturday, in the PeloncilloMountains south of Duncan, along the Arizona-New Mexico border, hadcharred 8,000 acres but was 80 percent contained.
Firefighters spent an eighth day Saturday battling thelightning-caused, 8,139-acre Divide fire 50 miles northeast ofSilver City in the Gila National Forest in southwestern New Mexico,U.S.
Forest Service officials said.
