Introduction: Coast Guard Commandant Paul A. Yost onTuesday attacked Exxon's plan to clean up the Alaskan oil spill.
Yost, the top federal official tracking the environmentaldisaster, said Exxon's plan was poorly drafted and lacking inspecifics.
But he stopped short of rejecting it, saying he wantedto meet with Exxon and state officials.
In Washington, consumer activist Ralph Nader said Exxon ``shouldnot be allowed to forget'' the spill and that a boycott would sendthe oil giant a message.
He and others blasted Exxon for failing to be prepared for thespill and not rapidly responding to the accident that fouledhundreds of miles of Alaska's coast.
``We are beginning the war of words and actions against any oilcompany that doesn't understand its responsibility to protect theenvironment,'' Massachusetts state Sen. Carol Amick told a boycottrally in Boston.
``The plan is very thin,'' he told a news briefing.
``There'snot a lot of backup or substantiation.
It was quite light, verythin.
There must have been a lot of figures there that I haven'tseen.
``We are going to be done this summer,'' Yost said.
Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner, who is to make hissecond trip to Alaska on Wednesday as overall coordinator for thecleanup, said he expected the size of the operation to double ortriple by the end of the month.
However, he said the cleanup, to be paid for by the oilindustry, could add $100 million to $500 million to Alaska'seconomy, which he said is more than the effect of the fishingindustry.
Exxon's 60-page, two-part revised strategy to cleanse some 364miles of Alaska's coastline of the oil spilled March 24 by thetanker Exxon Valdez was released Monday.
About 300 miles from the spill site, an observer saw thousandsof dead birds in a wide tidal basin in the Hallo Bay area.
``We saw 2,000 to 3,000 dead birds.
``We found large oil debris washing and slopping up on ourshores.
It was very bad,'' Bane said.
We saw one eagle so coated in oil that itcouldn't fly.''
But Bill Lamoreaux, the ranking state environmental officer atthe spill, said the laws would not be relaxed.
``The generalfeeling is that we would expect that they would comply with theenvironmental laws,'' Lamoreaux said.
U.S. Sens.
James Exon and Bob Kerrey, both Nebraska Democrats,called on U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to investigatepotential price gouging by the oil industry.
Since the Exxon Valdez accident, gas prices have increased anaverage 10 percent nationally, while the Northwest saw surges ashigh as 25 percent in less than a month, said Marla Rae, executiveassistant to Oregon Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer.
At a news conference in Houston, Exxon President Stevens said itshowed ``shocking naivete'' to blame the price hikes on his company.
``As you know,'' he told reporters, ``the market for petroleumproducts is set by thousands of markets, thousands of independentdealers across the nation.
