Introduction: Though the forms for the 1990 census are already at the printers, Congress is contemplating adding a question: Are you an illegal immigrant?
A majority of the members of the House of Representatives has signaled support.
Replied Rep. Jim Kolbe (R., Ariz.): " A very clear reading of the Constitution says that we shall count all those who are present."
Although the debate is often couched in constitutional arguments, it's largely driven by geography.
Wisconsin has few illegal immigrants; Arizona has lots.
"It boils down to regional politics," says Arturo Vargas, census-program director for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, one of several Hispanic organizations lobbying in favor of counting illegal immigrants.
The Census Bureau's chief antagonist in the Senate, Sen. Richard Shelby (D., Ala.), says seats for Connecticut, Michigan, North Carolina and Alabama also are at risk.
On the other hand, Texas, Florida and New York could benefit. "
Illegal aliens are actually taking representation away from Americans," says David Ray, spokesman for the Federation for American Immigration Reform.
That meant one extra seat in the House for California and New York and one less seat for Indiana and Georgia.
"You end up diluting the vote when you start including illegals," says Rep. Thomas Ridge (R., Pa.), who leads the charge against the practice in the House.
Organizations that represent Hispanics are particularly worried about the congressional campaign.
"If the Census Bureau attempts to ask people their immigration status, that's going to be even harder."
We won't report you to the housing authority {if there are too many occupants}," says Peter Bonpanne, an assistant director.
Although the 106 million census forms can be reprinted if Congress acts soon, wording a question so that illegal immigrants answer accurately is a challenge, Mr. Bonpanne says.
Rep. Ridge dismisses the practical problems.
not to gather demographic information."
The Senate, by a vote of 58-41, added a provision to a pending immigration bill to require the government to subtract illegal immigrants when it comes up with figures used for reapportionment.
The House did open the door to an amendment to a spending bill that would have barred census takers from "knowingly" counting any illegal immigrants, but the provision was quickly sidetracked on procedural grounds.
All sides in the debate predict a lawsuit no matter what Congress does.
A similar suit was dismissed this year when a federal district judge in Pittsburgh ruled that the states that sued -- Pennsylvania, Kansas and Alabama -- couldn't show they had been harmed.
The Constitution originally called for counting "free persons" and indentured servants, and for counting slaves as three-fifths of a person.
Only "Indians not taxed" were excluded, but no one has fallen into that category since 1940.
Elsewhere in the Constitution, the framers used the word "citizen."
