Like thousands of other farmers in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, they discovered that while cacao and coffee could give their families enough to eat, coca could make them rich.
In pursuing its strategy of trying to topple Peru's democratically elected government, it had concentrated its bombings and shootings in the mountains and in Lima.
This effort focuses on interdicting drug trafficking and eradicating coca plants.
But more important, if it were admitted that guerrillas are in large numbers in the Upper Huallaga, the army might again be given emergency control over the zone.
And this is something Peruvian and U.S. officials apparently would rather avoid.
The army was in force in the Upper Huallaga during the declared period of a state of emergency, from July 1984 to December 1985.
"It's better for the 'narcos' when the army is here," says one UMOPAR officer.
When new President Alan Garcia lifted the state of emergency, the army lost any ability it may have had to protect coca growers.
The troops were dispatched to other areas of the country, particularly in the mountainous Ayacucho region where guerrillas have been active.
With the army impediment gone, the anti-drug campaign set about pushing traffickers out of Tingo Maria, their former headquarters, eliminating coca growing in the immediate vicinity of the town.
But the narcos have now entrenched themselves in the towns of Tocache and Uchiza, where the police have repeatedly been blocked from entering by armed residents.
At the same time, farmers are now planting coca in rugged parts of the jungle, far from CORAH's sweep.
In return for their protection, the guerrillas demand that farmers turn over one-fifth of their coca crop, according to UMOPAR officers, farmers and priests.
The rebels then process the leaves into coca paste and sell the paste to international traffickers -- usually Colombians -- for weapons and money, local sources say.
An important guerrilla activity is organizing community self-defense groups against the hated police.
In early January, the rebels were apparently behind a strike protesting the anti-drug program.
For three days they shut down the 50-mile road from Tingo Maria to Rio Uchiza -- the only continuous, paved road in the valley.
The relationship between the Shining Path and the people of the valley is not entirely cordial.
As part of its efforts to impart revolutionary "justice" among the people, the Shining Path has administered brutal reprisals against those peasants who do not fit its "new-man" profile.
On March 13 in El Triumfo, a small community near Aucayacu, they executed a 23-year-old man who spoke out against a guerrilla-organized activity. "
That really shook up the 80 families in the community," says Enrique Pena, a parish priest who can no longer enter the guerrilla-controlled area.
The guerrillas are held responsible for assassinating six mayors in the area since 1985, including two mayors from Aucayacu, which has 3,500 residents.
