Introduction: What irony.
Most black leaders (as distinct fromrank-and-file blacks) are supporters, at least in public, ofthe gun control -- really, prohibition -- movement.
From there he was takeninto the Wisconsin territory, free territory above the 36 30'latitude of the Missouri Compromise.
After living in freeterritory for a while, he returned with his owner toMissouri.
It was in that setting that Chief Justice Taney made hisinfamous rulings:1.
That black people, whether free or slave, were notcitizens of the U.S.; therefore, they had no standing incourt.2.
Scott was denied freedom.3.
The Missouri Compromise was ruled unconstitutional.
Well known to most students of race relations is theformer attorney general and secretary of the Treasury'spre-civil war dictum that black people "being of an inferiororder" had "no right which any white man was bound torespect. "
And all of this would be done in theface of the subject race of the same color, both free andslaves, and inevitably producing discontent andinsubordination among them, and endangering the peace andsafety of the state.
"Although much of Justice Taney's overtly racist legalreasoning was repudiated by events that followed -- such asthe Civil War and Reconstruction -- the subliminal effectswere felt throughout that era.
In the post-Reconstructionperiod, when the pendulum swung back to overt racism, JusticeTaney's philosophy resurfaced.
It was during this period thatracial paranoia about black men with guns intensified.
It waspotent enough to cause the infringement on the SecondAmendment to the Constitution's "right .
to keep and beararms.
"Under natural law, a freeman's right to obtain andmaintain the implements of self-defense has always beensacred.
With the influx of large numbers of Irish, Italian andJewish immigrants into the country, gun laws now alsotargeted whites from the underprivileged classes ofimmigrants.
Eventually these oppressive gun laws wereextended to affect all but a privileged few.
Throughout thehistory of New York state's Sullivan law, enacted at thestart of the 20th century, mainly the rich and powerful havehad easy access to licenses to carry handguns.
Some of thenotables who have received that privilege include EleanorRoosevelt, John Lindsay, Donald Trump, Arthur Sulzberger,Joan Rivers and disk jockey Howard Stern.
