Introduction: Steep hillsides covered with trees and dense brush.
Narrow, winding roads.
Wood homes with shake roofs.
"I know it's there," said Saratoga Fire Chief Ernest Kraule.
Stateofficials say it's no coincidence that six of California's 10 most damagingwildfires have occurred since 1980.
Privacy's high priceHaving pushed intothese areas, city dwellers don't understand that the wooded seclusion andnatural beauty exact a cost in fire protection, rescue workers complain.
Incities, a firetruck might respond to an alarm within two or three minutes; inthe Highway 9 communities, they hope for 10 minutes.
"Those are the risks you take when you live in an arealike this," said Dean Lucke, chief of the forestry department's SanMateo-Santa Cruz ranger unit.
"We can't guarantee everyone's safety up here atall times.
"In general, firefighters say, the heavily wooded Santa CruzMountains are more susceptible to major fires than the grass-covered easternfoothills.
But there areexceptions, such as narrow Kilkare Canyon near Sunol, where 200 homes arestrung along a narrow, five-mile dead-end road that empties onto narrow,winding Niles Canyon Road.
If there's an area that hasthe significant potential for disaster, that's one.
"Codes rarely enforced;  In the hills, nearly every home is surrounded by thick brush or dense woods.
Instead, as they drive by, somefirefighters make mental notes about which homes would be worth saving.
The lesson of the Oakland hills, firefighters say, is to contain andextinguish even the smallest fires as quickly as possible.
But, often, thatmeans firefighters have to overcome narrow roads, weak bridges, inadequatewater pressure and gridlock from fleeing residents.
Challenge forfirefightersMany of the South Bay's most vulnerable areas -- such asRedwood Estates above Los Gatos and Emerald Lake Hills above Redwood City --began as colonies of summer homes, a handful of secluded cottages strung alongnarrow winding roads.
How would all those people escape?
"That's a good question," saidO.J.
Weak bridges keep firetrucks out of many of those communities, aswell as New Almaden Valley south of San Jose, forcing firefighters to carryhoses by hand.
In rural areas,water supplies are even chancier.
In the east foothills and southern SantaClara County, homeowners have to provide only 5,000 gallons for firefighting,barely enough for five minutes at the rate some firetrucks pump.
But many of the most dangerous areas were built longbefore modern planning ordinances and building codes.
Seven years later, the Los Altos Hills revolt against fire-retardant roofsstill resonates in the mind of Los Altos Fire Chief Dick Landrum, whosedepartment is charged with protecting the area.
