When Searle noticed a short, muscular black man walk toward them and then turn abruptly toward a bank of telephones, the plainclothes Los Angeles police detective moved in quickly to question him.
Within minutes, however, their words had turned into violence, and the two men toppled to the terminal floor where Searle handcuffed his suspect and pulled him to his feet.
Placing his hand across the man's mouth, the officer then marched him away before a gathering crowd of gaping passersby.
"There's no doubt in our mind that the only reason they stopped Joe Morgan was because he is black and he was the first black who happened to come by," said William Barnes, one of the attorneys representing the former ballplayer.
The Morgan case also reflects a growing criticism of police use of the drug courier profile to stem the flow of drugs through airports.
"It's purely based on race or dress, not on whether you are involved in any drug activity," said Gary Trichter, a Houston defense lawyer and former police officer who specializes in such cases.
Such suspicious behavior include erratic movements, paying for tickets with cash, using an alias, boarding a long flight without luggage and staying briefly in distant cities known to be sources of narcotics.
Last year, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that government agents may stop and question airline passengers who look and act like drug couriers.
But the court said brief detentions must be based on a person's behavior, not just on race or appearance.
William Booth.
He said that last year, 254 narcotics arrests were made at Los Angeles International Airport.
Frank Schults, chief of public affairs for the DEA in Washington, denied that his agency uses drug courier profiles.
Morgan is seeking unspecified damages, claiming that his civil rights were violated.
Last April, a six-person federal jury rejected Morgan's case.
But two months later, U.S. District Judge Mariana R. Pfaelzer set aside the verdict after ruling that she had failed to instruct jurors that Morgan had been illegally detained by police.
"There isn't any possible other conclusion but that the stop was illegal," the judge concluded.
Both Searle, a 20-year Police Department veteran, and William Woessner, a DEA agent who was subsequently dropped from the lawsuit, have denied that they did anything wrong.
"I wish (Morgan) luck now that I know who he is.
Morgan could not be reached for comment.
Minutes later, Morgan said, Searle grabbed him by the neck and they fell to the floor.
All I can say is that the guy is a great baseball player and appears to be a good announcer," Searle said.
Assistant City Atty.
Honey A. Lewis, who represents the officer and the Police Department, said Searle had acted properly and was merely asking Morgan to identify himself when Morgan suddenly became belligerent, spewing profanities and slapping the officer.
"My argument is that Mr. Morgan overreacted," Lewis said.
"If he had cooperated, none of this would have happened.
According to Searle's sworn court deposition, the incident began after he and Woessner, working together as members of an airport anti-drug task force, had arrested a passenger as a suspected drug courier.
They said he was using an alias.
Since the passenger was black and indicated that his companion "looked like me," the officer began looking for a black man who was nervous-looking or having "other characteristics of a narcotics courier. "
In his suit, Morgan denies that and contends that he suffered "acute physical and emotional distress and embarrassment" after the incident and expressed concern about damage to his reputation.
