Introduction:CONSIDER THE following case: A suspect involved in a high-speed chase refusesto stop.
Heis then picked up by his shoulders and his face is slammed into the pavement.
Irepresented the suspect.
The offending officer's police report indicatedthat the suspect's injuries were due to a fall from his bike and that heappeared unconscious, although he had also struggled against beinghandcuffed.
There is no mention of police brutality.
Another officerreported that the only verbal abuse was by the suspect toward officers.
According to the witnesses, the officer taunted thesuspect, knelt on the suspect's stomach, beat him numerous times with his cluband kicked him in his face.
The witnesses also said:The suspect at notime resisted.
What if there had notbeen four citizens who observed the brutal beating of my client?One ofthe problems in monitoring police brutality is that almost all victims ofpolice abuse have themselves committed some kind of law violation.
This makestheir complaints difficult to sustain.
MacNamara diagnosed the problem as anorganizational attitude for which the leadership must take responsibility.
Hecorrectly notes that it is important for police credibility that police chiefsbreak the code of silence and repudiate such acts and attitudes.
Unfortunately, MacNamara also believes that San Jose does not need a citizens'review board.
I respectfully disagree.
That is precisely what we need.
Communities often don't know the extent and the nature of police misconduct.
State privacy laws combined with investigation and reporting procedures keepbrutality complaints sealed.
Government mustremain accountable to its citizens.
As MacNamara points out, police are public servants.
Having the fox guard the chickenhouse fails to provide that assurance.
A system can betheoretically sound, but it must be respected by the public.
I agree withCouncilwoman Blanca Alvarado's suggestion and the San Jose City Council'sdecision to create a system where a city official will receive and trackcitizen complaints about the police.
I would further recommend that localcommunities establish citizen review boards.
Any loss of police confidentiality is a fair and necessarytrade-off for the right to carry and use a club.
