Introduction: With a third presidential candidateassassinated, Colombia's government refused Friday to put off nextmonth's election and vowed to keep up the fight against drugtraffickers.
But on Thursday, within hours of Pizarro's assassination, a manhad called the national radio network station Caracol and relatedin detail how the cartel had allegedly ordered the formerguerrilla's killing.
The authenticity of neither claim could be verified.
That is notthe first time there have been contradictory communiques, verbaland faxed, claiming and and then denying responsibility forassassinations and terrorist acts.
Since then, drug traffickers have killed more than 230 people,including judges, politicians, policemen, soldiers, newspaperemployees and two other presidential candidates.
But Interior Minister Horacio Serpa told reporters Friday thatthe elections will not be postponed or canceled.
Governing party candidate Cesar Gaviria, the presidentialfront-runner, suspended campaign activities following the Pizarrokilling.
He said such a movewould help ensure peace in the last month of the presidentialcampaign.
Barco, through a spokesman, rejected the proposal.
The Patriotic Union's presidential candidate, BernardoJaramillo, was fatally wounded March 22 at the Bogota airport by anassassin with a machine gun.
Pizarro's killer, 25-year-old Alvaro Rodriguez, was sitting tworows behind Pizarro on the flight and apparently retrieved themachine gun from an airplane bathroom before returning to his seat,Capt.
Fabio Munevar told Caracol.
Pizarro's bodyguards immediatelykilled the assassin.
The plane, en route to the Caribbean coastal city ofBarranquilla, returned immediately to Bogota.
Pizarro died about anhour later at a hospital.
In another development, church officials in Medellin said theyhad foiled a plan to kill Colombia's Roman Catholic prelate,Cardinal Alfonso Lopez Trujillo.
Three men disguised as police agents entered Lopez Trujillo'soffices on Wednesday and Thursday asking for the prelate, but hewas not in, said the church statement late Thursday.
