Yesterday, under artillery firefrom the federal army, they waved a white flag andsurrendered as Yugoslavia lurched closer to civil war.
Accompanied by tanks, jet fighters,helicopters, the regular troops, including paratroopers,battled Slovene militiamen across the breakaway republic.
They surrounded the airport near Ljubljana, Slovenia'scapital, and retook Slovenia's main border crossings withAustria, Italy and Hungary, effectively cutting offinternational traffic.
There were no official reports of casualties.
He claimed six government helicopters had beendowned. "
Reuters news service reported from Ljubljana thatthousands of local defense forces were patrolling withautomatic weapons.
Outside the Slovene capital, governmentarmored vehicles smashed through barricades and road blocks,leaving a trail of twisted metal, flattened cars andshattered glass.
In Croatia, the army moved into areas where fightingerupted between Croats and minority Serbs, Yugoslavia's twolargest nationalities and historic rivals.
Four people hadbeen killed and 14 hurt Wednesday.
Throughout the morning, federal soldiers, somebearing bazookas, fanned out in the woods surrounding theSlovenia customs house.
The Slovenes, about three dozen strong,waved a white sheet from one of the windows, laid down theirweapons and were marched down the road.
None of them seemedto be injured.
Here, the drama was watched by several Yugoslavstrying to return to their country from Austria; the cooks,waitresses and a few guests at restaurants on both sides ofthe border; several tourists who were caught on the Yugoslavside; and a dozen Austrian customs officers and policemen.
This is what we have come to," hesaid. "
Slovenes shooting at Slovenes.
Then he turned serious, scoffing, "Someindependence.
"Emil Herlec, a leader of the local Slovene mountain rescueteam, scrambled up the mountain, through the woods, when heheard the shooting. "
The first shots that have been fired inSlovenia since after World War II," he said.
"If we want ourfreedom, we will now have to defend it.
"In Ljubljana, Milan Kucan, Slovenia's president, vowed ina television address that the republic's militia wouldrespond with "all methods" to any aggression against his"independent state."
In Croatia,officials also vowed to defend their sovereignty.
So far, no foreigncountries have recognized Slovenian and Croatianindependence.
On the contrary, the European Community and theU.S.
But U.S. Secretary of State James Baker appealed toBelgrade to find a way for Croatia and Slovenia to expresstheir "national aspirations" through "negotiations anddialogue" rather than bloodshed.
The independence declarations came after months ofunsuccessful negotiations among the leaders of the sixrepublics over the post-Cold War shape of Yugoslavia.
TheCommunist leadership of Serbia, Yugoslavia's largestrepublic, insists on strong central control from Belgrade,the capital of both Serbia and Yugoslavia.
Serbian attempts to deny Croatia and Slovenia theirindependence are motivated by two fears.
And they fear losing the economic support ofSlovenia and Croatia, the two wealthiest republics.
