Gusty winds spread a third Wyoming fire over 400 acres of theBridger-Teton National Forest and forced the evacuation of acampground and summer cabins on Freemont Lake, a half mile from theblaze.
Last nightit sounded like every fire alarm in the area was going off.''
In California, a fireworks-caused blaze that swept over 2,200acres near Yosemite National Park was declared contained at dawnTuesday.
By Monday, $384,000 had been spent to combat the fire, she said.
Forest Service.
More than 670 firefighters from federal, state and localagencies cut trails in the rugged terrain by hand and usedairplanes to drop fire retardant, officials said.
About 40 weekend timber fires were attributed to fireworks.
But Dwight Barnett, a spokesman for the Tennessee Division ofForestry, said there were 26 wildland fires on the Fourth of July,which burned just 113 acres.
``We were very relieved to get through the weekend in such goodshape,'' he said, citing partly the care taken by people playingwith fireworks.
In Utah, Chief Ranger Bob Andrew said the Zion blaze was ignitedby lightning June 19.
No injuries or property damage was reported.
The Montana fire burned in the Absaroka-Beartooth WildernessArea in the south-central part of the state.
Weekend rain helpedkeep it from spreading outside the wilderness boundary, said fireinformation Officer Jo Barnier in Billings.
And a helicopter wasdropping water on the fire Tuesday afternoon.
Because all three fires are in the backcountry noefforts were being made to douse the flames, she said.
The blaze apparently was sparked by fireworks over the holidayweekend, Kingwill said.
In Michigan, authorities concluded a hot exhaust pipe or exhaustparticles triggered the Upper Peninsula fire, said Mary Mumford,spokeswoman for Hiawatha National Forest.
Firefighters also battled two smaller fires that broke out onthe Upper Peninsula Tuesday, burning 220 acres, Department ofNatural Resources spokesman Bob Heyd said.
Rising humidity and cooler temperatures were checking the fire'sspread, he said.
