The 31-mile tunnel, 24 miles of it underwater, will cut theLondon-Paris journey from six hours to three, as fast as ascheduled airline.
Some wonder whether Britain will beready for it.
``They're still arguing about whether it willintroduce rabies into this country, or let in terrorists.''
``They discuss it in terms of their being an island race, with achannel that has kept out invaders,'' she said in an interview.
State-owned British Rail will not commit itself to building ahigh-speed link from London to the tunnel in time to make thethree-hour journey a reality in 1993.
It intends instead to improveexisting tracks.
Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium that will own thetunnel, is urging British Rail to speed its plans.
Critics say thetangle of commuter lines in southeast England, so obsolete thattrains can be delayed by a sudden fall of autumn leaves, will delaytunnel traffic.
Arriving channel trains will terminate at Waterloo station insouth London, at a large customs and immigration terminal.
That means many loadswill have to be repacked or transferred to trucks unless thefacilities are rebuilt.
The grandiose project has been on and off the drawing boards formore than 200 years.
Digging began in 1882 but was halted by Britishfears of French invasion through the tunnel.
He says the entire cost of 5.2 billion pound ($8.8 billion)project is privately financed and cancellation would cost thegovernments ``enormous penalties'' to shareholders.
``It's quite difficult to get onegovernment to agree.
Money's power to move the tunnel forward was demonstrated inAugust, when drilling fell behind schedule.
From a a rate of 380 feet a week, the pace quickly acceleratedand recently achieved a week's record of 480 feet, Kirkland said.
Diggingbegan last December.
At its peak, the project will employ about 11,000 workers and 11tunneling machines.
Construction of the two one-way train tunnels begins inDecember.
A smaller service tunnel running between them now isbeing dug.
Tunneling machines simultaneously dig, remove rock and put uptunnel walls.
With a laser beam to keep the driver on course, the700-foot-long behemoth creeps along, pressing curved slabs ofScottish granite and pulverized ash into the newly exposed tunnelwall.
Once theall-clear is given, the two-story-high rotating blade with itstungsten teeth resumes chewing ahead.
The tunnels are to be completed in 1991, then the railroadtracks will be laid.
