Introduction: Here is a brief look at forest fire developments in the Westernstates:   About 2.1 million acres are smoldering from 30 fires, thefederal Bureau of Land Management said.
Sue Mitchell, a BLM spokeswoman, said there were no active, orflaming, fires and all but a few firefighters have been recalledfrom the blazes.
The Mariposablaze destroyed at least one home and grew to 250 acres.
Fire crews mobilized in the Star Valley of eastern Idaho afterthe 6,800-acre Trail Creek fire, fanned by shifting winds, brokethrough a control line and raced to within a mile of ranches andgrain fields.
Over 2,500 firefighters,backed up by National Guard personnel and equipment, were on thelines.
The supply of fresh fire crew members dwindles as workers entertheir third week of duty.
The U.S. Forest Service predicted hot anddry weather well past the Labor Day weekend.
Montana's three largest fires are burning primarily inwilderness areas: the 51,000-acre Canyon Creek fire in theScapegoat Wilderness in northwest Montana; and the 43,000-acreStorm Creek fire and 42,000-acre Hellroaring Creek fire in theAbsaroka-Beartooth Wilderness north of Yellowstone National Park.
Gov.
Oregon's Department of Forestry announced Wednesday that 3.8million acres of private, state and other forest in eastern Oregonwould be closed until further notice due to extreme fire danger andscarce resources to fight new blazes.
The fire isexpected to grow to 59,000 acres before it reaches fire lines.
Utah firefighters controlled a 525-acre fire near northernUtah's Pineview Reservoir and a 100-acre brush fire in ButterfieldCanyon, and expected to control a 60-acre blaze in eastern Utah bytonight.
Crews cut trails around major fires along the Kettle River Rangeon the Colville Indian Reservation and in Colville National Forest.
Firefighters wet down buildings at the Canyon cabin and hotelcomplex and moved brush and dead trees out of the path of the109,000-acre North Fork fire.
Eight fires are burning more than one-fifth of the park's 2.2million acres.
To the south in the Bridger-Teton National Forest, strong windspushed the 42,000-acre Huck fire 7,000 acres to the east Tuesday.
