Introduction:The smoke has cleared a little.
After seven long years, the US Congress thisweek passed its first significant gun control law since the assassinationsof Mr Robert Kennedy and Rev Martin Luther King Jr in 1968.The legislation - known as the Brady bill after Mr James Brady, the formerWhite House press secretary severely wounded in an assassination attempt onPresident Ronald Reagan - would impose a five-day waiting period onpurchases of handguns.
It would give law enforcement authorities time tocheck the buyer's background.
They point to glaring failings in the federal government's policing of the276,000 licensed gun dealers in the US as evidence of the Brady bill'slikely ineffectiveness.
For instance, one newspaper reporter successfullyobtained a dealer's licence for his dog by submitting a made-up socialsecurity number.
But even the most ardent supporters of the Brady bill acknowledge that itwill make no more than a dent in the estimated 7.5m legal sales each year ofnew or used firearms, let alone the approximately 200m guns in circulation;and will barely affect the more than 14,000 murders and 1,400 accidentaldeaths involving guns each year.
'The longest journey begins with a single step,' Mr Brady said after thebill's final passage in the Senate on Wednesday.
Virginia haspassed a law restricting people to one gun purchase a month.
The fear of violent crimes such as carjackings and drive-by shootings hasspread even beyond the inner city and into the suburbs and the countryside,provoking a widespread feeling that something - anything - must be done.
The message from an outraged public is not, however, unequivocally in favourof gun control.
Many new membersand gun owners are women.
Although Democratic Governor Jim Florio of NewJersey came close to victory in the gubernatorial race this month bystriking a tougher stance on both guns and crime in general than hisRepublican challenger, Mrs Christine Todd Whitman, this was not enough.
Voters were swayed by economic considerations and particularly by hisfirst-term tax increase.
In Virginia, meanwhile, Ms Mary Sue Terry, the Democratic candidate forgovernor, relied in her campaign on gun control and was thrashed by MrGeorge Allen, her Republican opponent, who did not favour tighter curbs butpromised to be tough on criminals by abolishing parole.
''The second amendment is not about duck-hunting.
Mr Knox says the Holocaust would not have happened if Europe's Jews hadowned rifles, and if the Nazis had not been able to confiscate guns, thanksto gun registration laws passed in the 1930s.
He also contends that thesolution to Somalia's problems is to arm Somali mothers with AK-47s.
Such beliefs have led the NRA to campaign against restrictions on machineguns, assault weapons and armour-piercing bullets.
Two trends over the past few years have weakened the advocates of gunrights.
Delegate Clinton Miller of theVirginia state assembly, once rated 'A+' by the NRA, now calls theorganisation's top members 'hateful, spiteful, arrogant'.This alienation is apparent among gun-owners at large.
Some Americans may move in this direction, but many more may put their faithin self-defence and buy their own weapons.
