Introduction: In less than one month, Lebanese security authorities in coordination with Jordanian authorities have succeeded in unraveling the mystery of the assassination of Jordanian diplomat Na'ib al- Ma'ayitah in Beirut on 29 January.
It seems that the Abu-Nidal group is not the only party responsible for the operation.
In this investigative report AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI reveals the details of this network, the secret meetings it held in Tehran, Amsterdam, and Beirut, the names of those who planned and carried out the assassination, the centers where they were trained, their affiliations, and how this leads to exposing dangerous secrets which made the Abu-Nidal group send threat letters to those in charge of the investigation.
Reports confirm that shortly after arriving in Beirut, Ahmad 'Abd-al-Karim left for the FRC's al-Rawdah camps in Western al-Biqa' from where he followed the investigation through reports sent to him by people who secretly work for the FRC and who provided him with information in exchange for generous sums of money.
At the same time, AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI has learned that the Abu- Nidal group recently sent threat letters to Lebanese officials who are currently investigating its members who are involved in the al- Ma'ayitah assassination.
These are: Yusuf Sha'ban, Bassam Muhammad 'Attiyah, and Yusuf 'Udwani, codenamed Salim Mahyub.
Lebanese investigator, Judge Sa'id Mirza ordered the arrest of the three Palestinians and listened to the deposition of three witnesses, including 'Afaf Yusuf [not further identified] who reiterated her previous deposition.
During the trials, this organization tried to claim that the weapons found by the authorities were temporarily hidden in Jordan but were to be smuggled into the occupied territories and given to the Palestinian strugglers there to enhance their ability to confront the Zionist forces and carry out military operations against them.
The IMYO also claimed that the weapons that were found were not brought in from any neighboring country but were purchased on the local market.
Most of the factions left for Lebanon where they found the suitable atmosphere and the appropriate place to carry out their activities in cooperation with Hizballah.
The information gathered also shows that some Jordanian fundamentalist elements moved to Iran where they received training courses in the Al-Quds camp and the Kermandi [name as transliterated] camp, and courses in intelligence work in the Darjah [name as transliterated] institute.
Iran has sponsored these organizations to establish Islamic organizations and cells in the countries that have common borders with Israel so they can take power in these countries and turn them into Islamic regimes.
Since that time, Iran exploited the elements from these fundamentalist organizations and established the Jordan office in the Liberation Movement's office.
Abu-Jami' now lives in Sa'dah, Yemen, which is home to camps for Afghan and Arab fundamentalists.
The information adds that the IMYO made several decisions to attack Jordanian interests and institutions and assassinate Jordanian diplomats in a move to pressure the Jordanian regime.
The information says that the scheme was designed some two years ago and the Muslim Brotherhood Movement in Jordan refused to get involved in it because of the danger and because the Brotherhood Movement does not agree with the proposals of other fundamentalist organizations.
The information confirms that Abu-Nidal group's leadership agreed to execute the mission for the aforesaid reasons, because of its commitment to the policy of extremism and rejection that aims at torpedoing the [peace] process, and because of its ties to Iran within the framework of international terrorism.
These meetings were conducted in the presence of an FRC official called Amjad 'Ata, a Lebanese member of Abu-Nidal group named Tha'ir, and a Jordanian IMYO official from the Idkaydik family.
The plan to assassinate al-Ma'ayitah was drafted during these meetings.
Al- ' Umayri was implicated in the assassination of the FRC official Bahij Abu-al-Hana in July 1992 in Lebanon's al-Biqa' area, after he accused him of contacting the 'Arafat-led Fatah movement.
He was charged with observation and backup when the assassination was carried out.
The man is called Khalid al-Bishtawi, 34 years old.
The FRC (Abu-Nidal group) took immediate steps after al- Ma'ayitah's assassination.
It seems that the investigations will not stop at this point in Beirut or Amman.
It also hastened to send one of its officials to Lebanon to follow the investigation and try to lessen its repercussions out of fear that al-Ma'ayitah's assassination may be one of the fatal mistakes committed by the FRC and may negatively affect the organization's future in Lebanon and Jordan.
