Leak a Mere Trickle A representative of the U.S.
"We've had no report of any wildlife hurt at this time," he said.
But environmentalists feared that if the oil reached the shore, marine birds would be threatened.
Environmentalists also expressed concern about whales, sea lions and other wildlife.
Gonzales said 200,000 barrels spilled into the sea.
Jon Nelson, a deputy regional director of the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service in Anchorage, said the reef ripped a 150-foot gash in the vessel, which was carrying 1.2 million barrels of oil, and there was fear that the tanker could break apart further.
The seas were calm Friday and the forecast was for continued calm until Sunday.
Infuriated local residents and environmentalists complained about the slow pace of the cleanup.
They are moving way too slowly," said University of Alaska professor Richard Steiner, who flew over the slick Friday.
"There (was) no oil (cleanup equipment) out there and it's been 14 hours since it happened.
"It is huge, literally huge," he said in a telephone interview from Cordova.
"It looks devastating.
The slick is probably five miles long by three miles wide.
They are bringing equipment from as far away as England.
Exxon's Parish said everything possible was being done.
The immediate response to the spill was handled by crews from the terminal at Valdez.
Floating Oil Booms Gonzales, the Coast Guard spokesman, said the terminal has cleanup equipment on site for minor spills.
Prince William Sound, home to orcas, sea otters and fur seals, is important to both the fishing and the recreation industries.
"It's also a pretty well-established tourist attraction, with sailing and glacier viewing trips.
Prince William is a gem."
"It's of concern for two reasons: one is the size of the spill and that this is such a sensitive, very productive area," said Lisa Speer, senior staff scientist with the Natural Resources Defense Council in New York.
"This is a consequence of North Slope oil development that is rarely mentioned."
Valdez City Manager Doug Griffen told the Associated Press that the 800-mile trans-Alaska pipeline, which carries oil from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez and the marine terminal, has a good environmental record.
Expected Worst " But this could be a catastrophic occurrence, so we're concerned," he said.
"Living in Valdez, we've always worried that sometime something like this could happen."
Alaska Gov.
The problem is that chemical use can have a bad effect on marine life," he said.
Cowper said that conventional responses, such as booms, probably would not work because the spill is so large. "
Now, we can't do that anymore."
