Introduction:   People caught by Hurricane Hugo lastyear might disagree, but forecasters here say the deadly storm mayhave had a positive side effect _ it got the public's attention.
And one forecaster says hurricane seasons may be getting worse.
Hugo, which caused an unprecedented $10 billion in damage,killed 28 people in the Lesser Antilles islands and an additional29 in South Carolina.
``Theconsequences of not being prepared are too great.''
If Hugo had struck a major coastal population center, thedestruction would have been greater than most Americans have everseen, according to computer simulations known as SLOSH models, forSea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes.
``The population density in South Carolina is a lot differentfrom the Florida coast, New Jersey or Galveston, Texas,'' Sheetssaid.
``Compare that situation to the Miami-through-Palm Beach area_ all of Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties would have been ...destroyed.''
Hugo was the worst hurricane to strike the southeastern U.S.coast since Betsy hit the Florida Keys in 1965, killing 74 beforeit went on to Missisippi and Louisiana.
``No one knows for sure, but the odds are, Florida and the EastCoast are going to get it,'' William Gray, professor of atmosphericscience at Colorado State University, told a national conference ofweather experts this month.
``But then he looked atthe rainfall over Africa, and found an amazing correlation betweenrainfall there and hurricane activity over Florida.''
``Whether one causes the other is uncertain.
They both mayreflect larger-scale events.
But the Sahel is now getting up tonear-normal rainfall,'' Sheets said.
Gray plans to release his predictions for 1990 on June 5.
Last week, a preseason tropical depression brought heavyrain to Cuba.
A tropical depression becomes a tropical storm and is given aname if its sustained winds reach 39 mph; it becomes a hurricane ifwinds reach 74 mph.
The names for Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms this yearare: Arthur, Bertha, Cesar, Diana, Edouard, Fran, Gustav, Hortense,Isidore, Josephine, Klaus, Lili, Marco, Nana, Omar, Paloma, Rene,Sally, Teddy, Vicky and Wilfred.
