In a fifth and more recent incident, the district attorney's office declined to file a charge of assaulting an officer against an Oxnard man who says he and several other guests at a June 15 private party were beaten by Oxnard police.
Instead, Anthony Flores, 22, was charged with five misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest.
The men involved in three of the five incidents have filed police brutality lawsuits against the city, the department or the police officers involved.
The suits, which seek unspecified damages and medical and legal expenses, are pending.
Deputy Dist.
But Jean Farley, a supervisor for the Ventura County public defender's office, said it is extremely rare for the district attorney's office not to prosecute a suspect who is accused by police.
The district attorney's office may have declined to prosecute the suspects because police brutality has been alleged, she said.
Prosecution is usually turned down when the arresting officer is suspected of using excessive force, she said.
"I don't think our reputation is any worse than any other department's," he said.
"There is always going to be a disagreement over how much force is used."
It began when four officers answered complaints about a loud party.
A police report said Flores started the fight by shoving a policeman.
Flores and his brothers, Alex, 19, and Luis Jr., 24 -- all of whom suffered gashes and scrapes on their heads and bodies -- said the officers beat them without provocation.
Donald Gran, who declined to elaborate.
Police Chief Robert Owens has ordered an investigation into the incident.
Gonzalez was taken to St. John's Regional Medical Center, where he underwent surgery and spent two weeks recovering from his injuries.
Edward M. Fox, an attorney representing Gonzalez, said his client, a gardener, might suffer some permanent injury to his right arm.
The report, however, does not say why the dog attacked Gonzalez or whether Gonzalez resisted arrest.
Police arrested Gonzalez on suspicion of disturbing the peace, Brodie said.
Fox said Gonzalez did not attend the wedding but was visiting a friend nearby and went to the parking lot to find out what was causing the commotion.
In a third incident, Louis M. Cornett, a retired teacher and licensed gun dealer, said he was beaten on Oct. 20 while in custody at Oxnard police headquarters.
Cornett said the altercation began as he was returning home after scouting out a site for quail hunting near Santa Maria.
Camarillo said Cornett fit the description of the man who allegedly brandished the weapon.
When he searched Cornett's car, Camarillo said, he found a semiautomatic handgun, several rounds of ammunition and a 12-gauge shotgun.
Camarillo admitted that he later shoved Cornett against a wall at police headquarters because the suspect had struggled and had clenched his fists in a threatening manner.
Guzman-Flores said he was working in a motorcycle repair shop on Jan. 27, 1989, when his boss asked him to investigate a noise in the alley behind the shop in the 1500 block of South Pine Street.
McCracken said the officers continued to question Flores in English, but Flores -- a recent immigrant from Mexico who speaks only Spanish -- could not respond.
Flores was handcuffed and shoved to the ground, causing Sedillos to trip and fall on him, according to the suit.
Sedillos got up and punched and kicked Flores several times while Younger held Flores in a "choke-hold," the suit alleges.
McCracken said Flores was beaten so severely that he suffered a detached retina and might lose partial sight in one eye. "
They essentially beat the hell out of him for nothing," she said.
When he asked the officer why he was being shoved, Ruggiero told him that he was under arrest, according to the complaint.
Officers Steven Vendt and Humberto Jimenez were called to assist Ruggiero, the complaint said.
"They used forcible brutality by hitting me with the baton on my elbow, knees and back, forcing me to drop down on the sidewalk with my face slammed against the pavement," Luna said in the complaint.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Luna, but in September, 1988 -- before his trial began -- all charges against him were withdrawn for lack of evidence, Brodie said.
Owens ordered the department's internal affairs division to investigate Luna's complaint.
He failed, however, to submit the claim for damages during the statutory six-month period after the incident and was barred by law from filing a lawsuit.
