The fugitive captain of the Exxon Valdez sent signals he wasready to surrender to face criminal charges of operating the vesselwhile drunk.
President Frank Iarossi.
A boom wasn't placed around the vessel for 11 hours because itwasn't available in Valdez, Exxon officials have said.
Iarossi also said Exxon has changed its policy because of thespill and now requires crews to be aboard ship, where drinking isprohibited, four hours before sailing.
Thick oil has floated over more than 1,640 square miles andsoiled 800 miles of beach.
Thousands of animals are known dead,including 30 sea otters.
Early Tuesday, Exxon said it had finished transferring about 42million gallons of crude to three other ships.
The company said crews would attempt to pump air into the holdand refloat the vessel off a reef at high tide Wednesday afternoon.
``We're not willing to trade in the environment for jobs,''Portland port spokesman Darrel Buttice said Monday.
Oregon Gov.
Neil Goldschmidt said Tuesday there are ``a lot ofquestions that need to be answered'' before the Valdez is allowedin.
In Washington, Environmental Protection Administrator WilliamReilly said the spill could put the brakes on petroleum explorationthere and in other areas.
But after Long Island law enforcement authorities waited asecond day for Hazelwood to turn himself in, the Suffolk Countydistrict attorney's office announced there would be no surrenderthat day.
Bail was previously set in Valdez at $50,000.
Of about three dozen oil-soaked otters rescued following thespill, about one-third have died, Alaska Department of Fish andGame spokesman Jon Lyman said.
Fishermen counting on the sound's $12 million annual herringindustry were told Monday by the state that it will not allow aseason this year.
Sablefish and shrimp fisheries in Prince Williamwaters also have been closed.
U.S. Sen. Frank Murkowski, a champion of oil exploration inAlaska, asked that plans for drilling in Bristol Bay, the state'srichest fishing grounds, be set aside until the industry candemonstrate that it can respond effectively to spills.
At the first Valdez City Council meeting since the spill, twocouncil members and Mayor John Devens expressed concern that angerand frustration over the spill was surfacing as harrassment ofpipeline company workers and their children.
Meanwhile, a multimillion-dollar class-action lawsuit was filedMonday in federal court in California against Exxon Corp., chargingthat the spill has led to gas prices of 10 to 15 cents more agallon for California drivers.
