Introduction:If Washington state imposes term limits on itscongressional delegation Tuesday, the issue of whether or notsuch limits are constitutional will take center stage.
They merely prevent aperson who has already served a certain number of consecutiveterms in office from serving another consecutive term.
State statutes that bar first-time candidates from runningfor Congress have been held to add to the qualifications setforth in the Constitution and have been invalidated.
Forexample, the 1972 decision in Dillon v. Fiorina struck down aNew Mexico law requiring candidates entering a congressionalprimary to have belonged to their party for a year and to paya registration fee.
The court will hear arguments Friday, and may rule later thismonth.
By 6 to 1, the California Supreme Court ruled this monththat the state's new term-limit law was constitutional.
Thecourt said the "state's strong interests in protectingagainst an entrenched, dynastic legislative bureaucracy"outweighed objections that term limits restrict voter choiceat the ballot box.
California's highest court rejected all of these arguments.
Term limitations do not restrict the right to vote for acandidate because of his or her ideology or party.
They may vote for that candidate again aftera "waiting period" has ended.
Federal courtshave upheld many state restrictions on who may qualify forballot access.
Likewise, term limits do not violate the Equal ProtectionClause of the 14th Amendment.
The Supreme Court has foundthat clause violated only in those cases where ballot accessrestrictions discriminate against the poor and against new,small or independent party candidates.
Unlike the age, residency and citizenship requirements,term limits do not prevent any non-incumbent from running forCongress.
Nor do they prevent a House member who has reacheda term limit from running for the U.S. Senate or vice versa.
Viewed in thisway, term limits imposed by states would be constitutional.
The Supreme Court has long held that the power to ensure afair electoral system, truly responsive representation inCongress and a high degree of citizen participation inelections rests with the states.
In its 1974 decision Storerv.
This law was found not tobe an improper additional qualification because a valid stateinterest was pursued.
"Elsewhere, the court in 1988 ruled in South Carolina v. Baker, that certain "extraordinary defects in the nationalpolitical process might render congressional regulation ofstate activities invalid under the Tenth Amendment."
Where the incumbent is almost the pre-ordained winner in anelection, there is no effective competition of ideas orcandidates and incumbents are less responsive to the will ofthe electorate.
States could allow an incumbent who has served a set numberof years in the same office to run again, but only as a"write-in" candidate.
Presumably, if an incumbent were trulyeffective and popular he wouldn't find that a crushingobstacle.
Two sitting U.S. House Members won their firstterms as write-in candidates.
Incumbents would certainly havethe resources to educate voters in write-in procedures.
Another option would require candidates to have "ballotstatements" appear next to their names.
Each candidate wouldhave to answer the question: "Will you adhere to a -- yearterm limit? "
Incumbents should take heed.
If they count only on thecourts to safeguard their political castles, they may be infor a rude surprise.
