Introduction:   Two years ago, it looked as if a vast part ofthe nation's farm empire was burning up as drought and heat parchedcrops and livestock.
But the 1988 drought wasn't as bad as it might have been,according to an Agriculture Department analysis.
For those who eked out someproduction, or had grain stored from previous years, it wasn't toobad.
All of the information used in the study was from USDA's annualFarm Costs and Returns Survey, which includes detailed income andexpense information derived from personal interviews of farmoperators.
Income innon-drought areas rose to $62,822 in 1988 from $50,967 in 1987.
As used by the agency, net farm income includes gross incomefrom farming during the calendar year, including federal payments,minus costs of production.
It also includes allowances for changesin the value of inventories and adjustments for depreciation andother factors.
_ The number of farms considered financially vulnerable continuedto decrease in 1988 in both the drought and non-drought regions.
_Farms in the drought region received lower direct governmentpayments in 1988, despite an infusion of federal disaster relief.
Thenine states studied as the ``drought region'' were Illinois,Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota, SouthDakota and Wisconsin.
In the drought states, 62.2 percent of the farms were said to bein favorable financial position, compared with 62.8 percent in 1987.
``A major factor in their improvement was thecontinued upward trend in land values.''
The report noted that higher market prices helped reduce thedirect payments to farmers in 1988 under USDA's commodity programs.
The nine states in the studycollected about $2.57 billion, or two-thirds of the total.
Strict measures are being taken to prevent the reintroduction ofthe tick, he said.
For example, animal carcasses with hides attached are noteligible for importation into the United States.
Hides that havebeen tanned or soaked in a saltwater solution with mineral acid,and dry antlers can be imported from Mexico without restriction,provided they are certified to be of Mexican origin.
Glosser said raw and untreated hides and antlers may qualify ifthey are certified by the Mexican government to have been treatedfor ticks.
Alternately, they may be dipped at one of severalMexican cattle export facilities along the border.
John Roberts, a scientist in the department's AgriculturalResearch Service, said the tiny plots are planted in July about 20miles apart along an interstate highway route through Georgia,Florida, Alabama, Louisiana and Mississippi, then looping back intoGeorgia.
That was a drought year inthe region, and so was 1987.
Then in 1988, some of the wheat plotson low ground near the Gulf Coast drowned out.
Highway maintenance crews sometimes mow down the wheat, alongwith the weeds, Roberts said.
