worse than death among blacks. "
Yet in a matter of weeks, Thomas goes before the Senate Judiciary Committeeas President Bush's nominee to join the increasingly conservative SupremeCourt.
To friends, his is a story of courage, tofoes, a story of opportunism.
Racial anger, protest lyrics; The homespunhomilies of his grandfather, the ruler-slapping discipline of the nuns whotaught him at a Catholic school in segregated Savannah, Ga., the racial angerin the writings of Richard Wright and Malcolm X, the iconoclastic theories ofsuch academicians as Thomas Sowell and William Barclay Allen, even the protestlyrics of singer-songwriter Nina Simone -- all are parts of the story.
Thomas takes immense pride in having staked out an independentcourse despite suffering what he said was a heavy personal toll in lostfriends and public condemnation.
Black 'intellectual clones'"I refuse tosubmit to the racially derogatory orthodoxy which says that all blacks shouldshare the same opinion on .
affirmative action, busing or welfare.
"Even his close friends have trouble explaining why Thomas tooka different road.
As a youth, Clarence Thomas shared the liberal attitudesof many bright young black people who were born into a segregated America andcame of age after freedom rides, lunch room sit-ins and the 1964 Civil RightsAct began erasing the overt signs of racial discrimination.
Hisrightward shift -- or, by his account, his circling back to conservativevalues -- began while he was a Yale law student from 1971 to 1974.Thomaswas admitted while an affirmative action program was in effect, although thereis no evidence that he would not have gotten in without it.
Friend's view;Whatever the reasons -- and his classmates and faculty members at Yale areunable to pinpoint any particular turning points or pivotal events -- Thomas"became more conservative as he went through the process of legal education,"said Harry Singleton, a friend.
Several years later he captured theattention of the Reagan transition team, which offered a civil rights job to areluctant Thomas.
A colorblind Constitution; In those jobs, Thomas began questioningpreferences in jobs and education for racial minorities who had historicallysuffered discrimination.
Thomas, who has declined to be interviewedsince his Supreme Court nomination, has not responded.
"You all made me become Republican," he told his incredulousgrandparents. "
Remember .
when you told me that it wasn't right to beg aslong as I could work and get it myself?
.Politically, I had no choice: The only party openly standing for those valueswas the Republican Party."
