Joseph Hazelwood, 42, surrendered to police in a Long Island suburb of New York City and hours later Judge Kenneth Rohl set bail at $500,000 -- 10 times what Alaskan authorities had sought.
Hazelwood left Alaska before local authorities could interview him, and had been pursued since Saturday on a fugitive warrant on three misdemeanor charges: operating a watercraft while intoxicated, reckless endangerment and negligent discharge of oil at sea.
Together, those three charges have a maximum penalty of 27 months in prison and a $10,000 fine. "
These misdemeanors are of such a magnitude that has never been equaled, at least in this country," Rohl said.
FBI officials in Washington say they also are investigating whether Hazelwood could be charged with felony violations of the Clean Water Act, which prohibits negligent discharge of pollutants into navigable waters.
No people have been killed or even seriously injured by the spill, but oil has seriously disrupted the rich Prince William Sound fishing industry.
Estimates of wildlife deaths are not easy to make because oiled birds are hard to spot from the air, and many beaches are difficult to reach for in person inspections.
As of Wednesday, 12 days after the Exxon Valdez ran aground, the 240,000-barrel slick was estimated to affect an area the size of Delaware, and Exxon's fleet of oil-skimming boats had picked up only about 5% of the spilled oil.
Rep. George Miller (D-Martinez), a senior member of the House Interior and Insular Affairs Committee added during a tour of Prince William Sound that fraud "is not too strong a word to describe Exxon's cleanup claims."
Alaska Gov.
You need a military system to get things done," the governor said.
Although Cowper said he did not want to be "extremely critical" of Exxon, a letter sent to the Coast Guard by a state environmental official said Exxon had been unresponsive. "
Exxon has failed to provide .
Rear Adm. Edward Nelson Jr., commander of the Coast Guard's 17th District in Juneau had no immediate reply to Cowper's request.
Exxon spokesman Henry Beathard said the company disagreed with charges it was not handling the cleanup properly and thought Exxon was the best organization to manage the effort.
"We gathered all the resources and organized the cleanup.
The tanker refloat went unexpectedly well.
The 987-foot ship lifted off the reef three hours earlier than the Exxon salvage crew predicted, proceeding without problem under close watch of a flotilla of six tugs and other support craft, including the Coast Guard Cutter Rush, to a cove on uninhabited Naked Island 25 miles to the southwest, where repairs will be made.
Even though a relatively well-known salvage technique was used to float the Valdez -- using compressed air to force water out of the ruptured hold and thus assist high tide in lifting the vessel off the rocks -- "we couldn't predict this by the exact hour or minute," said salvage coordinator Gary Gorski, who supervised from the ferry Glacier Queen II.
The air forced out some of the 998,000 barrels of sea water that had been pumped into the stricken tanker as oil was removed.
However, flow through the Alaskan pipeline returned to its normal daily flow of 2.1 million barrels Wednesday, the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. said.
Exxon officials were reluctant to estimate how long temporary repairs would take or discuss where the tanker would be taken to permanently patch its hull and rebuild its internal pumping system, which also was compromised in the accident.
Portland, Ore., was the company's first choice, but it backed away from that option after Oregon Gov.
Even as it made that concession, the company denied its ship would endanger any port it visited for repair.
Staff writer Larry B. Stammer in Valdez contributed to this report.
