Arecent Gallup survey found that 70% of House Members opposethe idea of limiting the number of congressional terms, whilethe public backed the idea two to one.
Martin Plissner,political director for CBS News, says he has "never seen anissue on which there was so little demographic variation.
"The message is clear.
Dissatisfaction with Congress is almostuniversal.
In the past three elections, 96% or more of Houseincumbents who ran won.
This lack of turnover has resulted inlegislative arrogance, a dearth of new ideas andunaccountability.
Congress just violated its legal budgetdeadline; where are the special prosecutors?Franking privileges, huge staffs, gerrymandering andunfair campaign finance laws have combined to give incumbentsa grossly unfair advantage.
Senators have become just as brazen as their Housebrethren in shutting out competition.
Take Republican SenatorLarry Pressler's latest mailing to South Dakotans.
Itcontains five pictures of the Senator and mentions his name29 times on four pages.
Last year, Mr. Pressler sent out morethan 2.8 million pieces of mail, the equivalent of 10 piecesper household.
It is a political axiom that people won't votefor someone they know nothing about.
The polls indicate voters by two to one think the only waythey can control Congress effectively is by limiting terms.
We also note that these critics are not agitating in supportof Ronald Reagan's call for repeal of the two-term limit forPresidents.
Getting incumbents to reduce the advantages they havevoted themselves is something like asking banks to leavetheir vaults unlocked.
Italready has won in Utah and South Dakota.
This fall, thegroup will try to get both incumbents and challengers topledge they will not serve more than 12 years in office.
Self-imposed limits on office-holding were once part ofthis country's public-service ethic, with Members returningto private life after a couple of terms.
They now think the voluntary service limitation ofthe past must be made mandatory.
