And today, yet again, everyone is talking about La Liz.
And through it all, there have been armies of press recording each divorce, each hospital stay.
No AIDS, they said.
Did the AIDS rumors start because of Taylor's ballyhooed friendship with publishing titan Malcolm Forbes, whose recent death touched off reports about his alleged homosexuality?
Or was it because of her reputation as a major fund-raiser for the disease?
Liz is as close to American royalty as you can have, and our readers .
in the heartland .
they're living and dying with her," said Barry Levine, Hollywood bureau chief of the Star, which featured a cover photograph of Liz, hooked up to an intravenous tube and oxygen mask, being transferred from the Marina del Rey hospital to St. John's.
In all, Liz's current illness has drawn the most attention yet, according to her publicist, Chen Sam.
Behind a chorus line of video cameras -- representing the major networks, the local stations, CNN and the tabloid shows -- reporters peppered the doctors with pointed and sometimes testy questions about Taylor's treatment and drug use.
"I heard some guys talking behind me, saying, 'I can't believe they're hounding her like this.'
" sniffed Val Richardson, a reporter from the Washington Times who'd flown in that morning.
She had apparently rebounded from a bad weekend, when doctors feared she might die.
Although Taylor's physicians are still trying to identify the virus, they are treating her for pneumonia with antibiotics.
Meanwhile, her own security guards keep watch over her private room in intensive care.
She has received her four children -- Christopher and Michael Wilding, Maria Burton-Carson and Liza Todd-Tivey -- friends Roddy McDowall and Carole Bayer Sager and Liz's younger, ex-trucker boyfriend, Larry Lee Fortensky, 38.
"I saw her yesterday and I was really pleased," Sager said Wednesday.
Her eyes were clear and she definitely understood what I said and motioned, made me know she understood. "
If Liz's public is fascinated by her frailties, perhaps reassured somehow by the knowledge that even the gods are vulnerable, their interest is also piqued by the public face she puts on her relentless brushes with illness and addiction.
"I think she's extraordinarily brave," Sager said.
She has needed it.
Taylor's respiratory ailments alone have been a recurring problem.
The cancellations prompted the play's co-producer, Zev Bufman, to declare, "Bronchitis has plagued Elizabeth all her life."
In fact, Taylor has been plagued by health woes ever since her 1945 film debut in "National Velvet"; her fall from a horse triggered a lifetime of back trouble.
But it has been her wrestling matches with weight and addiction that have consistently lured the world's curiosity and, at times, admiration.
When she emerged a born-again beauty in 1985 after shedding 60 pounds, and wrote a beauty book to boot, she was applauded by many -- including comedian Joan Rivers, who had made fat-Liz jokes the mainstay of her act. "
I got to a size 4 and said, 'Why not a size 2?'
But her battles against addiction have played havoc with her fight against the bulge.
And her persistent back problems have nurtured her dependence on pills.
She kept a diary that poignantly described that stay as "probably the first time since I was 9 that nobody's wanted to exploit me.
Now the bad news.
I feel like hell.
I'm going through withdrawal.
My heart feels big and pounding.
I can almost see it, running like red water over the boulders in my pain-filled neck and shoulders, then through my ears and into my pounding head.
My eyelids flutter.
Oh God, I am so, so tired."
But the Betty Ford clinic encouraged Taylor only to fight the good fights that had brought her there, rather than take on all addictions -- to drugs and food -- at once.
And the late '80s had found Liz, hobbled by back pain, returning to those two sources of comfort.
But through her ordeals, she has remained the same charmingly vain Liz who once declared her hobbies to be clothes and jewels.
And even when she was ambushed recently by a Star photographer, Liz couldn't help being, well, Liz.
Typical Liz Taylor.
