Introduction:just try explaining what GATT, the Uruguay Round or Blair House are allabout - but US investors have adopted a sensibly direct approach to theNorth American Free Trade Agreement: if Congress passes the treaty nextweek, it will be good for the economy, good for US companies, good for thestock markets, and good for President Clinton.
Investors are not alone in their optimistic view of Nafta.
What if Congressvotes no?
By coincidence, the day after next week's Nafta vote,Clinton will be in Seattle for a trade conference with leaders of AsianPacific Nations.
Investors' darkest fear is that a no vote on Nafta would throw such aspanner in the works of world trade that it would lead to a new era ofinternational protectionism, higher inflation and slower world economicgrowth.
In this scenario, inflation would be the biggest concern of markets.
Manyeconomists argue that the competitive forces unleashed by the acceleratingcollapse of international trade barriers have helped restrain globalinflation.
Low worldwide inflation has kept bond yields at historic lows,which in turn have boosted share prices to record highs in many markets.
Then there is the political cost of Nafta's failure to consider.
Althoughthe President inherited the trade pact from his Republican predecessor, hehas invested a lot of his own political capital in getting Nafta throughCongress.
Yet, opposition to Nafta among Democratic legislators beholden to labourinterests is considerable.
The result is that the President faces a tough fight ensuring that the Houseof Representatives votes to approve the treaty on Wednesday.
As of yesterday, the outcome of the vote was deemed too close to call.
Stockmarkets in Mexico and the US, however, believe the chances of success forNafta improved this week.
Gore clearly bested Perot in a heated war of words, and polls taken over thenext few days revealed that more Americans had been won over to Nafta.
Nafta is playing on investors' minds because doubts over its passage throughCongress have arisen at a vulnerable time for stock and bond prices.
A weekago bond yields jumped amid worries that resurgent economic growth mightrekindle inflation.
Although data released this week on producer andconsumer prices showed that fears of rising inflation are, at least for now,unjustified, equity investors remain nervous about rising bond yields.
