In the American mind, welfare has become synonymous with such evils as urbandecay, fatherless children, drug abuse and violent crime.
Since becoming president, Mr Clinton has barely mentioned the word welfare,raising fears that his grandiose promise will prove as cynical as formerPresident George Bush's 'read my lips: no new taxes' pledge.
It claims both measures will help shift people offwelfare by 'making work pay.
'The budget advanced this cause by expanding the earned income tax credit (akind of negative income tax).
This gives poor working families a cash bonusof up to Dollars 2,500 a year, increasing the incentive to take low paidjobs.
If healthcare reform guarantees health insurance for all workers,welfare recipients will no longer be able to reject jobs on the grounds thatthey stand to lose their health care benefits.
In addition, the administration promises to bolster the economic position ofwelfare mothers by strictly enforcing laws requiring absent fathers tosupport their children financially.
But they are hardly going to solve America'swelfare problem, which differs substantially from that in Europe.
So what should Mr Clinton do?Many conservatives favour the concept of a strict time limit.
Those whose welfarebenefits expire will face a stark choice: accept low-paid employment or handover children for adoption.
But no modern president would contemplate so brutal a social experiment.
One suggestion is that MrClinton should follow the example of Roosevelt's Works ProgressAdministration, an agency that at its peak created over 3m public sectorjobs.
After two years, welfare cheques would thus be replaced by the offerof a government job at slightly below the private sector minimum wage.
According to one advocate, this would amount to replacing thewelfare state by the 'work ethic state'.This solution is more appealing than a mere cessation of benefits.
Fortunately there is a fall back position for Mr Clinton: the bipartisanFamily Support Act of 1988, which he helped steer through Congress.
Thisrecognised the impossibility of ending welfare overnight and instead settargets for the gradual introduction of 'workfare'.
Next year states willreceive federal assistance only if they ensure that at least 15 per cent ofthe 'employable' welfare case load is working or in training programmes; by1995 the required ratio rises to 20 per cent.
These seemingly undemandingtargets require a much larger fraction of the welfare population to takejobs at some point during the year.
Like Mr Bush, Mr Clinton may have raisedexpecta-tions that simply cannot be met.
