The previous three-year contract ended onDecember 31.Some Botswana politicians want to change De Beers' exclusive sales contractso that part of their country's output can be sold independently of theSouth African group's international cartel.
On a political level this would enable the government toanswer its critics or its electors with confidence and sure knowledge whenquestioned about arrangements for the disposal of the country's mineralassets.
It claims analysts have estimated that 50 per cent of De Beers' diamondprofits in 1989 came from Botswana. '
'Other substantial producers such as the Soviet Union, Angola, Zaire andAustralia do not sell all their production to the CSO and therefore haveaccess to independent market information.
IDC does have a vested interest.
It already markets diamonds for producersin Guinea, Guyana, Brazil and the Central African Republic, and is offeringto do some marketing for Botswana.
It acknowledges that all sectors of the diamond trade welcomed the CSO'sefforts to keep the diamond market stable.
Mr Geoffrey Leggett at IDC suggests, however, the valuer only ensures thatthe assortment of diamonds from Botswana conforms to an agreed sample andthat the agreed contract price is paid. '
He is not a trader, he does notknow what the stones are worth in the market.
'De Beers insists it remains on cordial terms with Botswana and says thecountry is still selling its diamonds through the CSO.
The Botswana government recently set up a diamond cutting centre with DeBeers' technical help, and this, too, should further the country'sunderstanding of the market.
Prices of rough diamonds, with few exceptions, have moved upwards every yearsince the 1930s depression.
But now De Beers is steering the world's mostsuccessful cartel through depressed market conditions caused by therecession in the US (the biggest single market for diamonds), sogginess inJapan (the second-largest), and the Gulf war.
Itspromotional budget has been lifted by 20 per cent to more than Dollars 1m aweek - Dollars 53m for the year.
In addition, Botswana this year faces its first budgetary deficit since 1982and, according to De Beers' calculations, one of its diamond mines  - Orapa -needs investment of USDollars 600m.
However, the CSO is also currently involved in contract negotiations withArgyle Diamonds, the western Australian company which is the biggestindividual diamond producer in volume (but only sixth in value) terms.
However, the 'market window' idea isunlikely to be dropped and will almost certainly be raised again when thenext contract negotiations start.
