"I'm stunned," said Santa Ana City Council member Miguel A. Pulido.
Just before the voice vote, the senators voted, 50 to 41, against killing the proposal to bar aliens from the count.
Would Urge Veto Even if the prohibition survives, Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher has said that he would ask President Bush to veto any bill that comes to his desk with such a provision.
Federal aid to states also is frequently based on population counts, so millions of dollars in grants and other funds made available on a per capita basis would be affected.
Santa Ana has estimated its potential loss at $2 million a year.
In 1985, before the federal immigration reform act, the number of illegal aliens in Orange County was estimated at 229,000, ranking it just behind Los Angeles County in California, a county official said.
There are no current estimates.
"Those individuals, when asked or challenged about their status, can be legitimately concerned.
I think the census's attempt to question them could be misconstrued as an attempt by the immigration service to get information."
Sen. Thad Cochran (R-Miss.)
said that Georgia and Indiana both lost House seats after the 1980 Census, and that California and New York -- centers of illegal immigration -- each gained seats.
"There are enormous additional costs for states who have had a surge of population," Wilson said, adding that those states should receive additional federal aid to cope with the added problems.
The Senate's action would also have an impact on smaller California cities without substantial Latino populations because census population figures play an important role in Community Development Block Grant formulas, said Don Vestal, Westminster city planner.
The Community Development Block Grant formula, among other things, Vestal said, includes use of income figures and percentage of lower income residents in the city. "
And whether we like it or not they're here and here to stay," McDonough said.
In recent weeks, representatives from the census office in Santa Ana have visited such social centers as Abrazar and others and told center staff people that they intend to count "everyone, regardless of where they came from," McDonough said.
When asked to comment, census officials in Santa Ana referred media inquiries to the regional office in Van Nuys.
Opponents of a ban on counting illegal aliens said that a ban is impractical because the Census Bureau has already printed questionnaires that do not contain any question about legality of residence.
For 190 years, said Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-N.Y.), the federal government has counted all inhabitants without regard to citizenship in accordance with the Constitution's provisions.
The Senate's action was sharply criticized by Undersecretary of Commerce Michael Darby, but he voiced hope that it would be reversed by a Senate-House conference.
"There really is a widespread realization that this would not only be unconstitutional but literally impossible," Darby said.
Mario Moreno, head of the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund, said he was shocked by the Senate's decision.
"It is going to have a dramatic and disastrous impact in the Hispanic community," Moreno said.
A Census Bureau spokesman took a more dispassionate view, however.
"Our position is that we count everybody at their place of residence," said bureau spokesman James Gorman.
"If Congress passes a law that says we will or will not count people, we will do what it says."
