What usually results from this ill-considered radical surgery is that the very people who scheduled the operations end up in the recovery room.
The Republicans in 1951 wanted to ensure that there would never be another F.D.R., so they pushed through the 22nd Amendment limiting presidents to two terms.
The first President to come under the restriction was Dwight D. Eisenhower, a Republican who might very well have won a third term.
The latest institutional patients to be wheeled into the shock-trauma unit are the state legislatures.
By itself, the term limitation in Oklahoma might be written off as a cranky act of vengeance in a state not renowned as a political trend-setter, but similar measures will be voted on in November in California and Colorado.
Eager for straws in the wind in an otherwise trendless political year, some journalists have seen in the Oklahoma vote a backlash against incumbents, a manifestation of public alienation and an ominous sign to the Democrats, the party that holds the largest number of legislative seats.
The Oklahoma referendum is none of these.
Indeed, the goal of legislative reformers for the past 50 years has been more professionalism in the state assemblies, not less.
By turning out the legislators every 12 years -- or even worse, every six years -- you pretty much guarantee that those who are elected won't have much of a stake in their jobs.
They will use them as temporary hitching posts on their way to other offices without term limitations.
Lobbyists, of course, will rejoice.
One thing that legislators now have going for them is that they can become conversant with public issues and so challenge, if they care to, the self-serving propaganda of the special interests.
Celebrating, along with the lobbyists, will be the legislative staffs whose tenure would be unaffected.
It is an admission that the voters are civic imbeciles who cannot discriminate between bad lawmakers and good ones.
At the most basic level, term limitation is just flat-out wrongheaded and illogical: To throw everybody out when all you want to do is throw out the rascals is like burning down your house in order to get rid of the rats.
