The ``Chunnel'' between Britain and France is half-dug andscheduled to open on time in three years.
``We will have the money to finish the project,'' says AlastairMorton, British deputy chairman of Eurotunnel, the privately ownedAnglo-French company overseeing the work.
The Chunnel's June 15, 1993 scheduled debut will come six monthsafter the 12-nation European Community formally drops remainingtrade barriers and becomes a unified marketplace of 320 millionconsumers.
While the French are forging ahead with a high-speed rail linkto their end of the tunnel, for example, state-owned British Railis dragging.
Napoleon wanted to build it butBritain warned him off.
Tunneling actually was started insubsequent efforts in 1882 and 1974 but they were scrapped.
The Chunnel project also has been marred by eight accidentaldeaths on the site.
The British public demonstrates little enthusiasm for theChunnel.
Random samplings elicit fears that it will import rabies,terrorists, invading armies.
Giant boring machines are digging three tunnels toward eachother from Folkestone, England and Calais, France, with the firstunderground meeting expected in November in the service tunnelbetween the rail tunnels.
As of mid-June, workers had dug 53.2of the total 91.9 miles.
Chunnel trains will carry passengers, cars and freight betweenLondon and Paris in about three hours, roughly the same time as aflight including ground travel, and at least twice as fast as acar-ferry journey.
This past Wednesday, shareholders approved a sale of an extra$906 million worth of stock to existing shareholders, who alreadyhave bought $1.7 billion worth.
That step could clear the way for abank syndicate's approval of additional credit Eurotunnel hasrequested, from $8.6 billion to $12 billion.
The company mostrecently estimated it would cost $13.1 billion to complete, vs.$8.3 billion forecast initially.
``History dictates that that will not be the last figure wehear.
But the order of magnitude of increase will slow down,'' saidRichard Hannah, a transport analyst with the London investment firmUBS Phillips and Drew.
``It's one of these situations where the more money you put in,the more you have to spend or else you're walking away frombillions of pounds,'' Hannah said.
Eurotunnel says it doesn't expect to p end ofthe century, and probably won't pay shareholders a dividend until1999, four years later than envisioned.
Themore urgent worries for Eurotunnel have been costs, creditors andcontractor feuds.
The problems led to Eurotunnel's second management shakeup since1987.
The British government's refusal to finance a rail link haspresented another big obstacle.
But cnt that shewon't spend taxpayers' money on a rail link.
On the other hand, residents of Kent, in England's rural andprosperous Southeast, have campaigned strenuously against havinghigh-speed trains screaming through their back yards.
