Almost.
There was the bluster, the bragging, the promise of big things to come.
This scene, which played out two weeks ago in Italy, was familiar, with one exception.
Overweening confidence among world class athletes is well accepted -- even expected.
However, part of the expectation includes the understanding that the athlete can back up the boasts.
Johnson was also suspended from competition for two years; that suspension ends today.
1 athlete in the sport was using drugs.
With the accolades cast upon him in the previous years, people were resentful.
They hope the guy comes back clean and fast."
To some in track and field that represents a contradiction in terms.
Charlie Francis, who coached Johnson for 12 years, estimated that steroids made Johnson faster by one meter.
Johnson, speaking at a news conference in Castelfranco Veneto, Italy, expressed little doubt he can regain his form of 1988.
"I want to take back the titles and the records I have been deprived of," the Associated Press quoted Johnson as saying.
I am at 90% right now.
By strengthening training, I will be 100% by January.
I have decided to start again to show everybody I'm still the best.
I'm convinced I can set a new world record."
BIG MONEY Promoters of indoor meets this season doubt that Johnson will regain his records, but they hope that fans will turn out in huge numbers to watch him try.
And there is a bonus in the contract that rewards Johnson for high attendance figures.
It's been struggling.
Someone who is a ticket seller.
Transcendent is the word for the appearence fees Johnson will reportedly earn.
But American meet directors say they can't pay that kind of money, especially for an unproven runner.
But how well he's running will determine his value.
That's the key.
You're only as good as your last race, and the fans know that."
"I have no way of knowing.
If you give him $10,000 and people are beating him, you could have problems."
There is talk of informal athlete boycotts in Canada, where indoor meets often provide car fare and little else to star athletes.
he said.
"There are very few secrets among athletes, especially when there's X dollars given to one athlete."
Hamilton promoter Gaines has heard it before, and makes no apology for paying Johnson more than other athletes.
Right now, I can't think of anybody who would arouse as much interest as Ben Johnson. "
"We are very cognizant of the fact that people are looking upon his return with something like skepticism and animosity.
Franken said he had meetings with his sponsor, Sunkist, to discuss the possible image problem.
Schmertz, too, has given the matter some thought.
"He was the greatest sprinter in history, then he was caught.
Now he's got a lot of notoriety.
Are they going to treat him as someone who has paid his penalty and now he's clean?
I don't know.
These questions have gone through my mind."
Will Kern, meet director for the Times Indoor Games, hesitates at considering it a moral issue.
"I'm not God.
One thing that may not happen is a much-discussed lucrative match race between Johnson and Lewis.
"I will never allow it to happen," Primo Nebiolo, president of the International Amateur Atheltic Federation, said Sunday.
"We do not allow two-horse races."
A NEW CAST Johnson, 28, has passed at least four drug tests during his suspension.
Many of those around Johnson have changed, too.
Francis is no longer his coach, having been replaced by Loren Seagrave, former women's coach at Louisiana State University.
Others in Johnson's inner circle are Larry Heidebrecht, his agent; Kameel Azan, a Jamaican-born Toronto businessman and former hairdresser who is Johnson's adviser; and Ed Futerman, Johnson's attorney.
The key words in the Johnson camp are Damage Control, or more simply, control.
We don't need any more media."
He still is awaiting word from the Canadian Olympic Assn., which placed a lifetime ban on Johnson that prohibited him from representing Canada in the Olympic Games.
What happened to Johnson after his positive test in Seoul is similar to what used to happen to famous East Europeans after defection.
Any trace of them in their former countries disappeared.
Not only did he have to give back the gold medal, but he lost two world records, causing the sport to change its rules in order to take them.
The action gave the IAAF power to erase all of Johnson's results between June 12, 1983, and June 12, 1989.
Even though Johnson admitted to having taken drugs since 1981, the rule carries a six-year statue of limitations.
The rule stripped Johnson of his world record of 9.83 in the 100 meters and 6.41 in the indoor 60 meters.
Already gone was the 9.79 race from the Olympics.
If the public will pay to watch Johnson is another question.
Said Lumpp of the Meadowlands, "You don't have just a track and field story here, you have a human interest story.
Will he be the same Johnson?
