Introduction:EAST DENNIS, Mass.
-- It's 5:30 a.m., an icy rain isfalling from an indigo sky, and there's a stiff northeaster.
Mr. Kelley is in training for the Boston Marathon -- his60th Boston Marathon.
I'm struggling at the age of 43. .
This isn't golf.
"Even the thought of running a course of 26 miles and 385yards leaves some of Mr. Kelley's rivals of yesteryeargasping. "
Aghast is more like it," says Leslie Pawson, 86, athree-time Boston champion who ran against Mr. Kelley half acentury ago.
"My doctor says: `No running, whatsoever.'
Mr. Kelley is such an institution that Hopkinton, Mass.,where the race begins, has made him an honorary citizen.
("That means I don't have to pay taxes there," he jokes.)
Twostate troopers will run alongside the 5-foot-6, 130-pound Mr. Kelley into Boston so he won't be trampled by "groupies," ashe calls them, clamoring to shake his hand.
Last year, fiveJapanese runners were waved away by the bodyguards, as theysidled up to the old celebrity during the race.
Recalls SuniTomomitsu, one of the runners: "At first we thought, `Oh,wow, he's like Mafia man.'
But he walked the course.
Starting at dawn (sixhours before the official noon start), Mr. Foley wouldeventually saunter across the finish line in the moonlight.
His best time ever was in 1945: 2 hours,30 minutes, 40 seconds.
Last year he finished in 5 hours, 5minutes.
"That's not aprediction, just a goal," he says.
When John Kelley first toed the line in 1928, George Bushwasn't yet in kindergarten, Joe DiMaggio was an unknown andNike was the winged goddess of victory, not a running shoe.
"I would have loved to run with the worst pair ofsneakers on the market today," he says.
"Igot a medal and beef stew.
God bless them," he adds.
"Theydeserve it.
Physiologically,whatever that means, I got all A's," Mr. Kelley reports ofhis checkup four months ago.
"What that means," explains Kenneth Cooper, the physicianwho wrote "Aerobics" and several sequels and is now at workon a book on elderly athletes, "is that Johnny has the bodyof a man 23 years younger.
Mr. Kelley's resting pulse rate -- 60 beats aminute -- is well below the average person's 72 beats.
(That's good.)
On the stress test the clinic gives, Mr. Kelley holds the endurance record for his age group.
I rantill I was exhausted.
"In 1928, when he was 21, he entered his first BostonMarathon but didn't finish.
He dropped out three-quarters ofthe way through the race.
An Exxon station in Wellesley marks the halfway point.
Asteep descent into Newton Lower Falls can jar a tiredrunner's bones.
Then, at the end of a long column of oak andmaple trees, is Heartbreak Hill, his nemesis.
Though still going strong, Mr. Kelley acknowledges themarathon gets tougher each year.
To compensate, he trainsharder.
Hisroutes vary.
In January, he prefers the frozen sands of thebeach.
After his morning run, he spends a coupleof hours painting (still lifes and Cape Cod scenes), a hobbyhe took up about 25 years ago.
Unlike many runners, Mr. Kelley doesn't bother withstretching exercises before he runs in the morning. "
I set up the breakfast table.
Then Icheck the outside temperature to see what clothes to wear.
Heisn't particular about brands of shoes ("I wear them all") orwhat he eats ("I never eat broccoli, but I love steak and icecream.")Mr.
I run because Ilike it.
But I'll tell you, the BostonMarathon -- with all those people waving -- is better than mybirthday.
