Introduction:learned about the Shining Path meeting, according to an intelligence report datelined 31 March that states it was held in Razuhuillca, Huanta Province, Ayacucho.
As a result, Peruvian Air Force troops carried out operations in the aforementioned area during the second week of April.
Dincote also obtained information according to which "Feliciano" presided over the meeting, during which it was decided to start a new phase of the "people's war" as well as plan an operation to rescue Abimael Guzman, dead or alive, at any cost.
The five-point document issued at the end of the meeting is attached to lengthy citations of speeches by Abimael Guzman and documents signed by him that show why the war must not end.
We were taught that the revolution will not stop, will not become paralyzed. "
The document even mentions what must be done with those who uphold peace and put down arms: "There are two reasons for surrendering: to surrender in view of local reaction and to surrender in view of international reaction.
This is always the case.
Those who surrender, therefore, are no good, and must be wiped out through fire and bloodshed."
(Preliminary Session of the Second Plenum).
This plenum was labeled "glorious, historic, and momentous" as it planned the terrible wave of violence unleashed by the Shining Path in July 1992.
During the 1992 partisan meeting, it was stated that during an adverse situation the party should draft "a new plan, taking into account the experience of the past years, establish new axes, sub-axes, guidelines, and lines of action with a nationwide criteria (...), seek new ways to develop and set up strategic military plans, and establish, for example, those objectives and carry them out on an established date."
To defend the life of "President Gonzalo" by widely preaching our ideology, by showing great courage, placing even our lives at stake, by keeping our red and invincible flag flying high, and by pursuing our unwavering objective: communism."
To reassert the three strategies: the political strategy: to conquer power; the military strategy: the people's war, to develop the war of movements and promote arrangements for the uprising of cities; and the construction strategy: to make arrangements to conquer power in the midst of the people's war.
The third point discussed during the Central Committee meeting headed by "Feliciano" referred to the militants who uphold the peace accord.
The document addresses this aspect of the internal debate as: "About the Struggle Against the Counterrevolutionary Hoax and the Black Group that upholds a Right-Wing Opportunist Line (LOD)."
The agreements reached at the Third Plenum (March 1992) and the working meeting (August 1993) must be ratified because "facts have confirmed that the position established on those occasions toward the counterrevolutionary scheme was right and proper."
Abimael Guzman's letters to President Alberto Fujimori, the telephone conversation between Guzman and Javier Esparza Marquez (Guzman's brother-in-law, who is in charge of Shining Path's organization abroad), and the communiques released by Shining Path prisoners "are a counterrevolutionary scheme concocted by Yankee imperialists and the genocidal and traitorous dictatorship with the sinister help of the Black Group," the Central Committee concluded at its February meeting.
It added: "The short-term objective of this scheme is to win the elections, prevent the commemoration of (Mao's) centennial in December 1994, and cover up the La Cantuta affair, but the final goal is to annihilate the people's war and move ahead with their plan to murder President Gonzalo."
The Black Group is made up of "infiltrators, traitors, weaklings, and old revisionists, linked directly to reactionaries," meaning Osman Morote, Elena Iparraguire, Maria Pantoja, Martha Huatay, Edmundo Cox, and others who are in touch with government representatives and prison officials.
The activities of the Black Group "go against the conclusions of the Marxist-Leninist-Maoist-Gonzalo's Thoughts First Congress (1988), the BUP, the leadership, the party, and the people's war, which means that its members have voluntarily strayed from the party."
Thus, they do not represent the ideology of the Peruvian Communist Party-Shining Path.
Furthermore:   5. "
Gonzalo's "leadership" was also accepted but, as he is operationally restricted, he cannot lead the party anymore.
Guzman and the leaders who support his decision to hold talks with the administration signed a communique that was released in March.
This communique stated: "They are trying to separate `Gonzalo's Thoughts' from `President Gonzalo' the person.
Under the guise of defending the party, they are undermining it and its leadership so as to bring about its defeat, by using empty rhetoric to disguise their partisan, opportunistic, and personal interests and ambitions, and by taking a blind, biased, subjective, and superficial approach to concrete reality.
To continue it means sabotaging the peace agreement.
We warn our members against militaristic and revisionist approaches, and urge them to keep their eyes open to unmask this or any other scheme."
Such actions must be prevented to the extent possible, and immediately and categorically criticized."
Intelligence agents believe that the most likely targets are "financial companies, banks, stores, and industries, in order to sow confusion among local and foreign investors."
Other likely targets are "soon-to-be-privatized public energy and mining companies, the embassies of countries whose citizens are purchasing Peruvian companies, and the interests that these countries already have in Peru.
Government politicians and high-ranking members of the forces of order are also among the main targets.
Shining Path members believe that surrender deserves capital punishment.
The report explains that "Israeli experts in hostage rescue and underwater operations (demolition) have been hired for this purpose."
The Shining Path also considered the possibility of winning over Peruvian security forces personnel "so as to attract new members, including Armed Forces Special Operations personnel. "
The 21-page police report labeled Dincote-EM-2-Lima provides a detailed analysis of the behavior of the Shining Path and the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement throughout the country.
According to "Feliciano" and his followers, Guzman Reinoso has fallen prey to a plot designed to murder him. "
