On Wednesday, Exxon spokesman William Smith upped the company's estimate of the spill's total costs so far -- costs to Exxon and others -- to "about $2 billion."
The figure does not include any liability from more than 150 lawsuits Exxon faces from the spill, nor does it include additional cleanup costs should Exxon resume work in the spring.
Analysts were not surprised at the additional charge, though "it was a lot bigger than I expected," said Joel D. Fischer, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York.
Wall Street showed little reaction to the news, with Exxon's stock falling only 12.5 cents to close at $47 a share.
That raised Exxon's income by $535 million for the year.
Without the cleanup charge and accounting gain, Exxon said its net income for the year would have been $4.7 billion, down 10.6% from 1988, despite higher oil and gas prices.
The decline resulted mainly from slimmer refining and marketing profit margins and lower earnings from chemical operations.
In the fourth quarter, earnings before the Valdez charge were $1.28 billion, compared to $1.38 billion in the 1988 quarter.
Analysts said Exxon's size would insulate it from serious long-term financial damage from the charges.
The bad press will undoubtedly be aggravated when the criminal trial begins next week of the Exxon Valdez's captain, Joseph Hazelwood.
The previous charges covered everything from wages to boat rentals to boots, as well as payments so far of $177 million in claims by fishermen, cannery workers and other individuals affected by the spill, said Exxon spokesman James Robertson in Anchorage.
In addition, the state of Alaska has asked Exxon to reimburse it for about $34.5 million in costs; so far, Exxon has paid the state $7.4 million in cash and has agreed to pay bills amounting to $23 million more, said the state's Oil Spill Coordinating Office.
Exxon must also reimburse the U.S. Coast Guard and other federal agencies.
The office's operations will be transferred to Midland, Tex.
