Introduction: Most Southern Californians would agree that hills and canyons are among the most desirable places to live.
But these wild, yet settled, places at the edge of the metropolis -- what botanists sometimes call "the urban-chaparral interface" -- are the properties most threatened by wildfire.
"The idea behind fire-resistant landscaping -- firescaping -- is to design landscaping to minimize the fire hazard," says Owen Dell, a Santa Barbara landscape contractor who has many canyon and hillside homeowners as clients.
Dell became interested in the concept after the 1977 Sycamore Canyon fire in which 200 homes were lost and only a shift in the wind prevented the loss of additional Santa Barbara residences.
After the fire, Dell began studying its effects. "
I realized that the landscaping had a relationship to the amount of devastation."
The garden is landscaped into four plant zones, with the most flammable vegetation planted farthest from the house.
Native chaparral flora, including oaks, ceanothus and manzanita, are found here.
Zone 3 includes plants selected for their low profile and slow-burning characteristics.
Wildflowers such as Pacific Coast iris, monkeyflower and California poppies add a splash of color to this zone.
Zone 2 features highly fire-retardant succulents.
Some trees and plants are surprisingly hazardous. "
"If one of those lights up near your house, there's no way to save it.
Actually, it can be a menace.
Dell thinks several successive drought years have finally persuaded Southern Californians to rethink approaches to gardening.
Suddenly, xeriscaping -- landscaping with drought-tolerant natives -- is becoming commonplace and fashionable.
As Dell sees it, while many home gardeners have learned to deal with low-water conditions, they've virtually ignored another common Southern California occurrence -- wildfire.
Just as appropriate landscaping can help gardeners with water shortages, so may careful landscaping help reduce the risk of significant property damage in the most fire-prone areas.
The Firescapes Demonstration Garden is located across the street from City Fire Station 7 at 2411 Stanwood Drive and is open every day from 8 a.m. until sunset.
For additional information, contact the Santa Barbara City Fire Department public education coordinator at (805) 564-5703.
Bear right (north) on Sycamore Canyon Road (144) to Stanwood Drive (192).
Turn left and continue to the fire station, on your left, just opposite the garden.
