While the commission stopped short of blaming Chief Gatesfor these problems, it said that no chief should serve morethan two consecutive five-year terms, and that Mr. Gates,having served 13 years, should therefore turn in his badgefollowing a transition period.
But the chief, who has remained steadfast through repeatedcalls from community leaders for his ouster, said later: "Idon't expect to just run away" from the job.
Officers commonly typed racial epithets to one another ontheir patrol car computer systems, such as: "Sounds likemonkey slapping time" and "I almost got me a Mexican lastnight."
Yet supervisors made no effort to monitor or controlthese messages, evidence of a "significant breakdown in thedepartment's management responsibility," the report found.
"The word is clear: the public expects highquality law enforcement within the parameters of the law."Mr.
Williams likened the report to the Knapp Commission, a1970s blue-ribbon study that exposed widespread corruption inthe New York Police Department and led to significantimprovements there.
"As troubling as some of our findings are .
they arenot unique to Los Angeles," said John A. Arguelles, vicechairman of the 10-member Independent Commission on the LosAngeles Police Department.
-- A "major overhaul" of the police disciplinary systemand the process used by citizens to file complaints againstLAPD officers, especially in excessive force cases, isneeded.
But with the city still sharply divided over the future ofChief Gates, and a general feeling that taxes are high enoughalready, it's questionable whether there will be a populargroundswell to immediately fund changes.
Of the six largest policedepartments in the U.S., the nation's second largest city hasthe fewest officers per thousand residents.
"The commission's recommendations will now be reviewed bythe City Council, which will weigh whether to adopt them inwhole or in part.
Ultimately, voters must decide severalissues, including whether to set term limits on the chief'stenure.
Even before the commission's report was issued, communitygroups that monitor the LAPD noted a decline in brutalitycomplaints.
The harsh tone of the report was welcome vindication forcommunity leaders who have claimed that police brutality iswidespread.
The report "proves once and for all that theRodney King incident was not an aberration," said RamonaRipston, executive director of the American Civil LibertiesUnion of Southern California.
One officer who hadseven complaints against him that had been sustained -- aswell as numerous others that hadn't been -- was described inhis performance evaluation this way: "His contacts with thepublic are always professional and positive and his attitudewith the citizens is one of concern.
Sexism and homophobia abound.
Minority officers complain that whites dominate managerialposts within the LAPD, possibly contributing to theseproblems.
More than 80% of the black, Hispanic and Asianpolice officers in the force are in the entry-level ranks,the report said.
"We're not startled by any of the things in thisreport," the chief said a few hours after its release.
There's alot of thoughtful recommendations."
Mayor Bradley said he hopes that Chief Gates's will"follow the commission's recommendations" to "commence thetransition to a new chief of police."
