``There's a problem there in that he was not there.
It's ourpolicy he should have been there.''
An Exxon spokeswoman, Sharon Curran-Wescott, said she believedCousin's actions violated federal regulations.
``I am unaware of any explanation he has made at this time.
As clean-up efforts continued Sunday, fishermen fearing lostincome sought compensation Sunday.
Exxon Shipping Co. held ameeting Sunday between fishermen and a company claims officer.
``We expect fullcompensation.''
Ten supertankers remained anchored 33 miles from Valdez, unableto move toward shore because the harbor remains closed.
Gov.
Steve Cowper declared Prince William Sound a disaster area,freeing state resources for cleanup and paving the way for afederal disaster declaration.
We'll be requesting President Bush to make a similardeclaration.''
The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez, carrying 1.2 million barrelsof North Slope crude oil loaded at Valdez, ran onto a reef 25 milesfrom the port early Friday after swinging out of a traffic lane toavoid ice.
Estimates put the spill at 240,000 barrels of oil, or about 10.1million gallons, making it the biggest U.S. spill on record.
The Coast Guard estimated the area affected by the spill at 100square miles.
The transfer of oil remaining aboard the Exxon Valdez to theExxon Baton Rouge resumed late Saturday.
Tests were under way to determine if dispersal chemicals shouldbe used despite the potential for environmental damage.
The agentsneed wave action to help break up the thick crude oil.
However, the wind and waves may make it more difficult to skimoil off the water, said Coast Guard Lt. Ed Wieliczkiewicz.
Environmentalists, the governor and other top state officialshave accused Exxon and Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. of respondingtoo slowly to the spill.
Alyeska operates the terminal at Valdezthat loads tankers with North Slope crude.
``We're proceeding cautiously,'' said Exxon spokesman TomCirigliano.
The largestis 20-by-6 feet.
All six tanks along the port side remain intact.
Four are oiltanks; two are ballast tanks.
Investigation of the accident was turned over to the NationalTransportation Safety Board on Sunday.
The ship's captain and twobridge crew members, including Cousins, were relieved of dutySaturday and subpoenaed by the NTSB.
Hazelwood was in his cabin atthe time of the accident, Iarossi said.
The third member of the bridge crew was identified as helmsmanRobert Kagan.
The three were administered routine tests for drug and alcoholabuse, but the results were not immediately available, officialssaid.
Many are concerned they will get only minimal harvests becauseof the oil damage, and then will face the longer-term problem ofbad publicity.
``It's possible they could avoid the oil,'' Brown said.
``Fishare not stupid.
Rick Steiner of the University of Alaska Marine Advisory Programsaid the beaches on which the herring spawn could be polluted.
Fishermen said they have had two good years back to back, andsome were spurred by that success to go into debt for new equipmentthis year.
``Half of Cordova is operating on credit,'' Ott said.
