Introduction:   Inside a small motor home , JoannePierluissi raised her sleeve as nurse Mary Perez inserted a needleinto the vein above her forearm, drawing blood into a tube for adiabetes test.
As her daughters watched, Pierluissi, 24, said it was for them,as much as for herself, that she agreed to be tested for the deadlykiller of Hispanics.
Twelve million Americans have some form of diabetes, but it mostprevalent among minorities, especially Native Americans, blacks andHispanics.
San Antonio, the nation's ninthlargest city, with a population that is 50 percent Hispanic, isbecoming the base for diabetes studies.
Epidemiologist Dr. Michael Stern has devoted 10 years to studyingHispanic diabetes and led the grassroots study of the most commonform, which develops mostly in obese adults over 40 who may have afamily history of the disease.
Educating elementary-school-age children about healthy dietswould help reduce the number of diabetes cases, DeFronzo said.
Aly El-Shiekh envisions astronauts on athree-year trip to Mars ``knitting'' themselves a space stationusing ceramic fibers that can be braided into panels, beams, boxesand practically any other shape.
``We believe if they can take the ceramic fibers they need andthe machinery we're developing they would be able to literally makethe space stations they will need as they go,'' said El-Shiekh, amechanical engineer at working in North Carolina State University'stextiles school.
El-Shiekh and his students are developing machinery to braid longstrands of ceramic fibers.
``It is stronger than steel, does not rust and would not wearaway _ the road would not deteriorate.''
The fibers, including Kevlar now used to make bulletproof vests,also could be used to make some body parts, and El-Shiekh is workingwith Duke University researchers on ceramic ``stents,'' collapsiblebraces for arteries.
It's 8 p.m. and a dozen people wait in the lobby ofBoston City Hospital's emergency room.
Behind the swinging doors,Dr.
Peter Moyer is called to a car accident victim who has onlyslight injuries but slips so deeply into unconsciousness he canbarely be roused by two physicians.
``Have you taken any drugs?''
doctors ask.
``Cocaine, heroin,marijuana?''
It's a question that has become more and more commonplace inemergency rooms already burdened by increased patient loads.
Drugs, and their side effects of AIDS, violence and psychiatricdisorders, play a role in the problems plaguing big-city emergencyrooms, Raske said.
From 1986 to 1987, according to the National Institute on DrugAbuse, cocaine-related cases in emergency rooms increased 122percent in the District of Columbia; 86 percent in both Boston andAtlanta; 80 percent in Detroit; 73 percent in Chicago; 53 percent inMinneapolis; 50 percent in Texas, and 39 percent in New York City.
``It's really providing a major backlog in the emergencydepartment system,'' said Diane Howard, director of the AmericanHospital Association's division of ambulatory care and healthpromotion.
``The real loser here is the patient.
