While it's true themost visible term limit advocates are right of center, themovement is picking up many prominent liberal and Democraticsupporters.
Certainly the polls show that term limits areoverwhelmingly popular with Americans regardless of income,party, race or sex.
Last month's Wall Street Journal/NBC Newspoll showed Americans back term limits by 75% to 21%nationwide.
Democrats and blacks both gaveterm limits 71% support.
Women favored term limits more thanmen.
Martin Plissner, political director for CBS News, sayshe has "never seen an issue on which there was so littledemographic variation.
"One reason is that term limits would open up politics tomany people now excluded from office by career incumbents.
These include blacks, other minorities, and women.
One ofthe authors, Sherry Bockwinkel, says "You won't see whiteincumbents hanging on to districts that long ago becamelargely minority.
House election in Virginia yesterday.
FormerRep.
We need a lot more turnover."
ColoradoRep.
Term limits for Congress have been supported by some ofhistory's most prominent Democrats.
Harry Truman and John F.Kennedy both endorsed the idea while they were president.
Today, former California Governor Jerry Brown saysadvocacy of term limits is a key element in his populistpresidential campaign against a "constipated" politicalsystem. "
Last year, as head of the CaliforniaDemocratic Party he refused to sign a party slate maileragainst term limits.
"Breaking the gridlock of incumbency could throw the doorsopen to new people and new ideas that would make politicsrewarding, meaningful and fun," says Ms. Kunin.
"The systemneeds a kick in the rear," says Mr. Lamm.
"Term limits haveflaws, but they will provide badly needed competition.
InMassachusetts, the state's Democratic attorney general andsecretary of state both favor term limits.
AnnRichards says she "would be glad" to sign a bill limitingcongressional and legislative terms.
Lt. Gov.
The liberal Seattle Times,Washington state's largest newspaper, stunned its readers byendorsing term limits.
Currently thenational treasurer for the American Civil Liberties Union,Mr.
Calaway was also chairman of the national DemocraticParty's $15 million "Victory Fund" in 1988.
He says termlimits would mean "we're governed by citizens who go homeafter their service and not permanent, elitist people whonever leave office."
"People who say term limits are aRepublican plot to oust incumbents should know that amajority of open seats are won by Democrats," says Rep. AndyJacobs of Indiana.
"Democrats must offer votersmore than the simple powers of incumbency," she says.
