Introduction:The Yugoslav army issued a "final ultimatum" to breakaway Slovenia on Saturdaynight to halt what it called continuing attacks against federal forces inSlovenia or face "decisive military action.
His statement, just a day after both sides agreed to a cease-fire,indicated that a plan to resolve the state's ethnic, political and economicdisputes had gone off the rails less than 18 hours after it was accepted.
Earlier Saturday evening, Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic forced yetanother delay in the election of Stipe Mesic, a Croat, as president ofYugoslavia.
Slovenia refused Saturday night to send a representative toBelgrade for a meeting of the eight-member Yugoslav presidency.
Preparations for hostilities were widespread.
Thepeace package was assembled by federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic, brokeredby an emergency mission of the European Community and accepted by the leadersof Slovenia and Croatia, as well as Serbia.
Condition upon conditionMilosevic, seizingon Kucan's statement, insisted that Serbia would not allow Mesic to becomepresident in the normal rotation until the Slovenian and Croatian parliamentsagreed to the moratorium.
The Slovenian government charged the army withrepeated breaches of the cease-fire and demanded the surrender of army unitsand installations that Slovenian forces had surrounded and cut off since thefighting began Thursday.
Kucan all but ruled outthe chances of negotiating the return of Slovenia to Yugoslavia.
'No wayback'"There is no way back from Slovenian independence," he told reportersin Ljubljana.
"The Yugoslav army appeared to be beefing up its militarypresence in Slovenia, sending additional tanks across Croatia toward Sloveniaand dispatching two warships from Split, in Croatia, to the port of Koper, inSlovenia.
The Slovenian defense forces continued efforts to recapture borderposts and said they had several under their control.
Ljubljana, the Slovenian capital, was anarmed camp, where armed civilians and territorial guards stopped people atrandom and demanded identification cards.
Croatian peasants, fearing a surprise attack, reportedly hid in the woods nearthe Slovenian border 50 miles north of the capital.
Croatian PresidentFranjo Tudjman said his republic was not hoping for a fight but was ready ifneed be.
"Butif we are attacked, we will respond.
Thecrisis evoked further expressions of anguish from foreign leaders, and for thefirst time a high-placed U.S. official hinted that the administration may beweighing the possibility of recognizing Croatia and Slovenia. "
The presidentand the secretary (of state) have never said 'never,' " Deputy Secretary ofState Lawrence Eagleburger said in a television interview.
The StateDepartment said Saturday that U.S. dependents at its consulate in Zagreb,Croatia's capital, were being allowed to leave Yugoslavia.
The only other U.S.diplomatic post in Yugoslavia is in Belgrade, the federal capital.
