Introduction:Consuelo wishes she could share her First Communion this year with Abuelita.
She misses her grandmother very much.
Abuelita was not very old -- just 62 -- but there was not much the doctors could do to save her life.
She had uncontrolled diabetes: her kidneys were failing, her blood pressure was too high and she finally died of a heart attack.
The reason is diabetes, a silent killer that afflicts one in eight Latino adults.
This rate is higher than that of any ethnic group except for American Indians.
and other health education groups in the Los Angeles area and California have begun a major push to educate Latinos about diabetes.
The effort is being aided by interested physicians and by drug companies, which make insulin and other drugs used for diabetes that can't be controlled by changes in eating habits.
Like heart disease, the adult-onset diabetes most common among Latinos is a condition that can be largely prevented with proper diet and exercise, doctors say.
But in fact, they change," Davidson said.
"What happens is, fast foods are readily available .
and they are higher in fat and calories.
And at home they didn't have a car, and here instead of walking we take the car to go one block.
If you have already a predisposed group of people, such as the Latinos, you get more obesity and you get more diabetes. "
sponsored a diabetes health fair at Olvera Street Plaza on Aug. 26.
It results from the body's failure to make insulin or, some studies indicate, from its inability to use insulin that is available.
In one survey done in San Antonio, a third of the Latinos between the ages of 55 and 65 had diabetes, Davidson said.
Latinos' higher susceptibility is thought to result from a combination of both heredity and diet.
In addition, Latino diets can be rich in high-calorie fried foods that promote obesity and increase the chance of getting diabetes.
Diabetes that begins in childhood requires daily insulin injections.
Latinos, who often have less access to regular health care than Anglos, are more likely to go undiagnosed, Matkin said.
The new educational efforts to change that picture are necessary, not only because they help individuals stay healthy but also because the nation's health care funding crisis will only get worse if the problem is not reduced, Davidson said.
The number of Latino diabetics in the United States will nearly quadruple by the year 2000 to 8 million, according to projections by Eli Lilly Co. Caring for them will cost more than $10 billion a year, even if the disease has no complications, the company projects.
Yet life-style changes today to cut down on obesity can prevent many of those cases from ever occurring, health officials say.
That means adapting an Anglo-oriented health education network to the needs of a diverse Latino community that has a different social structure, health beliefs and eating habits from the majority culture.
For instance, the fact that Type II diabetes frequently shows up in women during or shortly after pregnancy gives health educators an ideal chance to influence an entire Latino family's eating habits, said Dr. Martin Montoro, co-director of the diabetes and pregnancy service at Los Angeles County-USC Medical Center.
Any Latino woman whose child was born at 9 pounds or larger should consider herself at risk of diabetes and alter her diet, Davidson said.
Recent immigrants and even some longtime U.S. residents are not likely to want to switch completely away from a diet reliant on beans, tortillas and other carbohydrates, Montoro noted, but modifications can be made easily.
Chief among these is that the Latino patient is less likely to volunteer information or to notice early diabetes symptoms than the Anglo patient, said Dr. Aliza Lifshitz, a board member of the California Hispanic American Medical Assn.
Any physician practicing in Southern California needs to be aware of that and to learn to ask more diabetes-related questions of their Latino patients, Lifshitz said.
He pointed to the recent indications that Americans' risk of heart disease is lowering as examples of how educational programs can work.
"We need to give them the opportunity to enter the health care system, and we need to give them the opportunity to learn that diabetes is the biggest health care issue that they are going to face into the year 2000."
* Excessive thirst * Frequent urination, including having to get up in the middle of the night * Wounds that take longer than usual to heal * Excessive weight gain during pregnancy; giving birth to a baby weighing more than 9 pounds * Extreme hunger * Blurred vision * Dramatic weight loss * Itching * Fatigue HOW TO AVOID DIABETES * Eat less to get rid of extra pounds.
For instance, eat one tortilla instad of three * Cut down on fats -- broil meat instead of frying it, remove chicken skin before cooking it, don't put bacon or chorizo in beans, don't fry tortillas for enchiladas or tacos * Eat more fruits and vegetables * Get regular exercise.
Walking 30 minutes a day is the easiest and cheapest form of exercise * Cut down on simple sugars such as in pastries * See a doctor regularly DIABETIC DIET BOOK The Los Angeles district of the California Dietetic Association has published a helpful booklet, "La Dieta Diabetica," which it revised this year.
The booklet, written in both English and Spanish, is available for $5.76 from the California Dietetic Assn., Box 3506, Santa Monica, CA 90403.
, (800) 828-8293; (213) 381-3639; or (714) 662-7940.
According to the American Diabetes Assn.
