But the view doesn't impress Joe Bridgman of the AlaskaDepartment of Environmental Conservation.
``Oil,'' he says.
``Smell it?''
``Hundreds of gallons of oil are locked up under this beach,''he says.
``And this isn't isolated.
``The beaches can look beautiful at the surface, but you can digdown, in this case just a few inches below the surface, and findlots of oil.
Certainly, the worst isover; thousands of dead birds no longer wash up on shorelines asthey did last summer.
Any hope of a quick solution faded last summer as oil from theExxon Valdez spread across 1,100 miles of Alaska's wild southerncoast.
But when Exxon suspended its $2 billion cleanup inmid-September, it had recovered only 5 percent to 9 percent of theoil spilled, state officials estimate.
About 20 percent to 40percent is believed to have evaporated.
That leaves 50 percent to75 percent of the oil in the water, on the ocean bottom or onbeaches.
Some was soaked up by unwilling sponges: the seabirds, eaglesand sea otters whose carcasses now lie frozen in five vans in anAnchorage storage yard, awaiting their day as physical evidence incourt.
Workers found more than 1,000 dead otters, a sizable chunk ofthe spill area's total population of 15,000 to 22,000.
Many of Prince William Sound's 3,000 bald eagles also suffered;at least 151 died, most poisoned by scavenging the oily remains ofsome of the 34,400 dead seabirds recovered.
But that maytake up to 70 years for some hard-hit seabird colonies, U.S. Fishand Wildlife Service researchers say.
Assessment studies for these populations are not finished, andeven preliminary findings are hard to come by _ researchers havebeen told by lawyers to save their findings for court, where itseems nearly everyone involved in the spill is headed.
Capt.
Fishermen sued because of lost seasons.
Tour-boat operators suedbecause fewer people wanted to cruise an oiled sound.
Information about the spill is filtered through this litigiousatmosphere, making much of it suspect.
State officials cite an October survey that showed 117 miles ofshoreline remained moderately or heavily oiled, with oil more thantwo feet deep in some spots.
They say observers flying over thesound still report 15 to 20 oil sheens bleeding off beaches daily.
``From a layman's point of view, what's left out there is reallyinsignificant,'' said Exxon scientist Andy Teal.
