Just as prospects brighten for the beleaguered "chunnel,"Britain risks failing to take full advantage of thecross-channel link.
"Long plagued by soaring costs and drilling delays, thetunnel now looks set to open on time in June 1993.
Britishdiggers, who once lagged months behind schedule, currentlyare just one week behind; their French counterparts arerunning three months ahead of plan.
And although theproject's estimated cost has soared to #7.66 billion ($13.11billion) from #4.9 billion, tunnel executives have obtainedunderwriting for an equity rights offer and preliminaryagreement for more bank loans to cover the added cost.
He said British Rail, which owns 50% ofthe consortium, would consider other options for a fast-raillink.
But no one expects a viable scheme anytime soon.
Defending the decision, Mrs. Thatcher earlier toldParliament that the government already had earmarked almost#2 billion for chunnel-related projects, including #600million on roads leading to the tunnel and #1.3 billion inpassenger and freight rail services.
"Britainwill enter the 21st century with an inadequate 19th-centuryrailway link," said John Prescott, the Labour Party'stransportation spokesman.
Passengers boardinghigh-speed trains in Paris will zoom at 180 miles an hournorth to Calais, slow to 100 miles an hour through thetunnel, then crawl at an average of 60 miles an hour acrosssoutheast England's crowded commuter belt.
Eurotunnel insists the tunnel will be financially viablewithout the high-speed rail link.
"We make more money on road traffic using our tunnel," Mr. Morton says.
The high-speed link "will be abenefit for us," he says, "but essential for the country.
"If you're going to build high-speed rail, you haveto decide how to provide complete links.
It's like havingpart of a house built.
"The worries don't end in London.
North of the capital,industrialists fear poor railway links will isolate them onthe fringes of the European Community's single market.
But "it's important that thequality of the rail network and capacity is improved.
I don'tthink there's any time to lose.
