Introduction: A white Long Beach police officer who allegedly pushed a black man through a plate-glass window during an arrest that was secretly videotaped by a television crew acknowledged Friday that he made errors in his official report.
He blamed the discrepancies on a faulty memory, saying he wrote the report more than three hours after the altercation occurred.
Dickey, who was testifying under subpoena, admitted under questioning that the black man, Don Jackson, never used profanity during the arrest as Dickey had indicated in his report.
Police Misconduct Allegations Sen. Daniel Boatwright (D-Concord), chairman of the Senate Select Committee on State Procurement and Expenditure Practices, called the hearing into the incident to review allegations of police misconduct in Long Beach.
The legislative committee monitors state funds disbursed to police departments by the state Police Officer Standards and Training Commission.
Investigations have been launched by the FBI, the Los Angeles County district attorney's office and the Long Beach Police Department.
At one point, Boatwright asked Dickey: "You became the judge, jury and executioner as to whether he was challenged to a fight?"
"No," Dickey tersely replied.
This little kangaroo court gives these politicians a chance to run for office.
Any resemblance between this and a fair hearing is just imaginary," Hannon told reporters afterward.
"They are taking stuff out of context and just badgering him with it."
Earlier, under questioning by Boatwright and as the videotape was played, Dickey testified that the alleged infraction for which the Jackson car was stopped -- crossing the center divider -- occurred before it could be seen on a tape shot from the NBC chase vehicle, but he maintained that the tape does show Jackson's car weaving slowly within the traffic lane.
Dickey acknowledged that the police car he was driving "was weaving all over, too" as it tailed Jackson's car.
Also, Jackson alleged, officers refused three requests to loosen his handcuffs as he was taken to the police station.
But Dickey conceded at the hearing that it was he, not Jackson, who uttered obscenities.
No Taunts Heard The report states that Jackson challenged the officer to fight, although Jackson never is heard taunting the officer on the tape.
He said his actions were an attempt to "accomplish my No.
1 job that night: to go home in one piece."
Dickey denied it.
The officer said Jackson's face crashed through the window when Jackson suddenly pulled forward.
Dickey, who cut his hand, noted that Jackson suffered no facial injuries when the glass shattered.
Boatwright adjourned the hearing, which was held at the Hall of Administration in downtown Los Angeles, after about six hours of testimony.
He said it would reconvene later to hear from the additional witnesses.
