Introduction: Wearing a bright yellow flame-retardant shirt, Donald Despain crouches down to study the ash-covered forest floor.
The scorched hillside around him appears utterly lifeless.
Where many people recoil at the sweep of nature's destructive power, the 47-year-old Mr. Despain marvels at the tiny steps life is already taking to renew itself.
His eyes red from the blowing ash, Mr. Despain patiently counts the quarter-inch lodgepole pine seed "wings" within a rectangular frame he places on the hillside.
"This is amazing," says Mr. Despain, reflecting on his count.
Only about 500 mature trees were on an acre of hillside here before the fire.
Of course, not all the seeds will become trees.
Deer mice will eat some of them.
Others won't take root.
Grasses and several types of wildflowers, ranging from fireweed to wild geraniums, are already sprouting less than seven weeks after fire roared past Grant Village near Yellowstone Lake.
More edible plants, in turn, support larger, and more various populations of birds and other animals.
Mr. Despain's research should play a major role in a new debate over whether to reforest burnt areas of Yellowstone or to let nature take its course.
But the approach is again under attack.
Critics, including elected officials from Western states and the logging and tourist industries, have grabbed headlines by blaming that policy for fueling the inferno that this summer raged over half of Yellowstone's 2.2 million acres and cost more than $100 million to fight and clean up.
Reforestation would give wooded areas in Yellowstone a "five-year jump" on natural regrowth of the woods and would "get it green again," says John Davis, Willamette Industries Inc.'s general manager for Western timber logging operations in Lewiston, Idaho.
Gerald M. Freeman, the president and chief operating officer of Stone Forest Industries Inc., agrees: "Controlled burning, selective logging and reforestation are a much better way to manage the forests."
The pressure to bring back Yellowstone's forest through reforestation may get intense.
In an average year, 2.5 million tourists visit the huge park, and a drop-off because of the fire damage could severely hurt business.
New Jersey's governor, Thomas Kean, for instance, announced that his state planned to donate thousands of evergreen seedlings to replant Yellowstone, apparently without realizing that none of the proffered species are indigenous to the park.
Although the offer was later amended to include native varieties, the park service politely declined.
Mr. Despain hopes that the scientific evidence that park researchers are gathering will testify to the forest's ability to renew itself, while countering emotional calls for human help.
"When I hear the word 're-vegetation,' my blood runs cold," he says.
In addition to his seed-counting, Mr. Despain has created nine "before and after" study plots to gauge effects of the fire.
After the fire is out, he surveys damage to a plot.
Next spring he will chronicle rebirth.
Yet only 10% to 15% of land within these boundaries was scorched by raging crown fires that burn everything in sight, Mr. Varley estimates.
In fact, nearly half the area within the fire zones remains untouched by fire.
The burnt "snags," as charred tree trunks are called, creak in the wind above Mr. Despain and are all that remain of a forest section that sprouted after a fire swept through here about the time of the Civil War.
Mr. Despain says it is no coincidence that most burnt trees here were senior citizens, relatively speaking, and highly susceptible to fire.
As lodgepoles age, they lose some of their natural resistance to disease and insects.
Dead trees fall to the forest floor, joined by others blown over by the strong winds howling down from surrounding peaks.
The thinning canopy then lets more light through to the forest floor.
"Most plant species have adopted one means or another to ensure their survival."
The top layer of the sandy brown soil has been seared by flames.
But less than an inch beneath the surface the searing stops.
Carol Shively, a park ranger-naturalist at Grant Village in Yellowstone, says, "Next spring is going to be a spectacular one for wildflowers. "
With their roots undamaged by the flames, aspen trees return to their juvenile phase for three to four years, and will add as much as four feet in a 90-day growing season.
By next July, one will find it difficult to tell which meadows burned in 1988.
Forests visited only by ground fires will rebound almost as quickly.
Shrubs and grasses cover what is left of the burnt undergrowth, although fire scars will be visible on some trees for years.
But many snags, weathering to fence-post gray, will remain as monuments to the fire of 1988 for years to come.
Lodgepole pine seedlings grow as much as a foot a year in the open, although a few inches per year is more common at first.
At that point, the pines -- still less than 15 feet tall -- begin to choke off light reaching the forest floor as their limbs grow together.
Mark Palmer, the chairman of the Sierra Club's national wildlife committee, sees another virtue in the aftermath of a fire: "Meadows are much more valuable to wildlife than dense forests. "
Among the new arrivals may be the three-toed and blackbacked woodpeckers, the mountain blue bird and the Western wood phoebe.
Memories of Bambi and Smokey the Bear notwithstanding, Yellowstone's large animals don't appear to have suffered from the fire.
It's too early to tell whether the fires, which burned some lower pastures, affected the herds' ability to weather Yellowstone's long winter.
More winterkill among the herds might be expected this year in any case, since animal populations are now near their historical upper limits.
They certainly did seem that way to some people.
So far, Mr. Mott, who didn't return calls for comment, doesn't appear in danger of losing his job, park service officials say.
But Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel says he favors certain, unspecified changes in the natural-burn policy.
Congressional hearings are also likely.
On a recent evening, about a hundred park visitors made the pilgrimage to one of the world's natural wonders -- the largest concentration of geysers to be found anywhere on earth.
These and the rest of the park's thermal features remain unscathed by the fires.
The sun had just set with an ash-tinted tangerine glow behind the hills to the west.
A quarter moon was visible as well.
At exactly 7:24, as predicted by the sign in the window of the tourist-information office, Old Faithful sputtered once, twice and shot plumes of white steam high into the fading light.
and perhaps to see how nature is restoring the forest.
