Lucky punchessometimes win wars, and maybe this was the case.
We had beenallowed into a "safe house" that, according to InteriorMinister Agustin Mantilla, had been used as headquarters bythe leaders of the Marxist guerrilla movement.
This was the undergroundorganization's central nervous system, commentedinvestigative Police Chief Fernando Reyes Roca, a short manwho is a consummate bureaucratic survivor.
Interior Ministryspokesman Fernando Yavera joked that this find was going toput Shining Path watchers (such as myself) out of business.
Alas, as it turned out this was not the rebelorganization's headquarters, nor its central nervous system,but more of an archive and memorabilia repository.
Is it makingprogress or losing ground among the population?
Its first actions were cautious, modest andoften ludicrous in a crazy way (like hanging dogs fromlampposts, with scribbled insults over them to ChineseCommunist martyrs).
But the actions intensified and soonbecame quite lethal.
While President Fernando Belaunde's regime did what itcould to maintain democratic legality at first, it was quiteunprepared to deal with any insurgency -- especially with onethat had been meticulously planned and organized severalyears before the first shot was fired.
Now about 50% of all Peruvians live under emergency law.
In10 years, the war between the Shining Path and the governmenthas cost about 20,000 lives.
If the armed forces have been rightly accused ofsystematic violations of human rights (Peru ranks as one ofthe world's worst human-rights offenders), the militaryfaults the civilian authorities for failing to providemuch-needed leadership.
There are no kind words for Mr. Garcia, on the other hand.
But things began to unravel soon after.
But dialogue wasdisdainfully rejected: Dozens of these professionals wereassassinated, and the armed forces slowed down their actions,while the rebels made largely unimpeded progress.
Andfor the first time, death squads -- linked by some analyststo Mr. Garcia's APRA Party -- began to contribute to thekilling.
In 1988,1,986 people were killed as a result of insurgent orcounterinsurgent actions; in 1989, 3,198 were killed; and1,730 during the first six months of 1990.How well is Mr. Fujimori expected to deal with theinsurgency?
His campaign pitch advocated an approach closelyresembling that of Mr. Garcia's first year.
"{Themilitary} should mainly provide security for developmentprojects," Mr. Loayza says.
He stressed that the main thrustof Mr. Fujimori's "pacification" policies would be to addressthe "structural violence {read: social injustice} that makessubversion possible."
Free-market economist Hernandode Soto, who has been advising Mr. Fujimori during the pastmonth, thinks that might be the case. "
"Even if Mr. Fujimori proves to be a quick learner, he willhave his work cut out for him.
Running against all majortrends of contemporary history, the insurgents have followedShining Path founder Abimael Guzman with the commitment thatthe faithful reserve for their prophet.
This was evident whenwalking through their safe house in Lima.
It looked, said aPeruvian journalist, like the seed for the future "Museum ofthe Revolution" -- wood carvings; woven baskets; tapestries;paintings; chiseled stone; all meticulously, lovingly craftedwith the mythified motifs of the internal war.
