With the last of the winter snow rapidly melting, much of Yellowstone is bathed in the glorious hues of spring.
Either way, they're dead.
Once-lush hillsides are now covered by little more than the skeletons of stately lodgepole pines.
Their needles, twigs and even limbs gone up in smoke, some of these "widowmakers," as loggers call them, still jut precariously from the charred dirt.
Others lay scattered across the ground like giant pick-up-sticks.
He turns a spade of blackened earth and finds rich brown soil just beneath the crust, a sign that the forest not only remains fertile but will soon be teeming with new life.
In a few weeks, meadow floors will be carpeted in a thick blanket of wildflowers.
"Did you see the green?"
asks Shovic, ecstatic. "
I'm amazed.
It's going to be a picture postcard."
Spring Brings Rebirth Spring has come to Yellowstone and with it an inspiring process of rebirth and renewal.
But while the 1988 blazes have long since flamed out, the controversy they kindled is still smoldering.
On the other hand, they are also set aside as vacation and tourist havens for the taxpayers, who, after all, pay the bills.
If nothing else, said James Agee, a forest ecology specialist at the University of Washington, the furor raised by the fires should force environmentalists to temper their purist approach to park management.
"They are inextricably tied to their neighbors for better or worse."
The Interior Department, parent of the National Park Service, has already ordered a summer-long moratorium on its politically sensitive "let-burn" policy, under which lightning-triggered blazes are allowed to burn unless they threaten human lives or property.
The edict applies to all but two parks in Florida. "
And, after a sweeping review and nationwide public hearings, the agency has tentatively decided to modify -- though not flatly abandon -- the controversial fire strategy once the moratorium expires.
Under the changes, expected to be announced shortly by Bush Administration officials, all parks would have to run through a safety check list that includes an assessment of weather, moisture, winds and available firefighting crews before they could make a decision on whether or not to let a lightning fire burn.
Leading environmentalists are cautiously optimistic about the new plan because it retains at least a stated commitment to the retention of so-called "natural" policies.
At the same time, however, they warn that saddling park managers with extensive conditions could effectively result in quick suppression of all wildfires.
"They're going to say 'we better just put out the fires,' " Scott predicted.
"There could be a chilling effect on allowing nature to take its course."
From an ecologist's standpoint, the "let-burn" policy could be the most serious casualty of last year's blazes, which swelled to historic proportions and ultimately seared nearly 1 million of the park's 2.2 million acres.
Heeding complaints that fires were getting out of hand and could threaten surrounding communities, officials suspended the policy by mid-July.
"What is most humbling is that one-quarter inch of rain and snow on Sept. 11 essentially stopped what the greatest firefighting effort in history could not," argued John Varley, Yellowstone's chief scientist.
All that stuff about burning's good for growth is a crock.
Will Keep Job While many critics have called for Barbee's head, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. said in an interview that the Yellowstone superintendent was in no danger of losing his job.
To a great extent, lingering resentment over the conduct of firefighting efforts is fueled by economic uncertainty.
This year, only one of the rooms has been taken so far.
The park has embarked on an unprecedented publicity drive as well as an $8.5-million rehabilitation project to reassure reluctant tourists that it has not been transformed into a bleak wasteland.
We have the rare opportunity to witness wildlife regeneration on a scale rarely seen anywhere on Earth."
A new $250,000 exhibit on fire ecology is under construction, as is a series of wayside exhibits describing various fire scenes.
Expect Many Scientists While the response from tourists is still questionable, the park is bracing for an unprecedented onslaught of scientists looking into everything from fire behavior patterns to its effects on grizzly bears, fisheries, grasslands and the nesting status of bald eagles.
"Hundreds of people are here doing research," said Karle.
"It's like a big laboratory."
Even local merchants, suppressing any anguish over the fire and its ultimate impact, are jumping on the bandwagon.
Another hot item: videos. "
Yellowstone -- The Place Where Hell Bubbled Up," comes in both 90-minute deluxe and 30-minute highlight packages as well as a Japanese narrative version.
"There was no ecological downside to the fires," Barbee said recently. "
The media, in my opinion, went into a frenzy.
They outdid themselves with hyperbole."
Natural, Beneficial Another major post-fire study, this one conducted by a panel of experts from several major universities, has yet to be released.
Ecologists are in total agreement that wildfires were a natural part of the primeval North American landscape," Christensen testified. "
Although less frequent, fires approaching the size of those in 1988 occurred in the 1700s and probably occurred at 200- to 300- year intervals through the Western mountains over the past 10,000 years."
Bob Secter reported from Yellowstone and Maura Dolan from Los Angeles.
Branches below the productive region of the crown (upper 8 to 10 feet) die and fall off as the tree grows.
Stage 2- Closed canopy of even-aged, usually dense young trees (40 to 100 years).
Stage 3- Lodgepole pines dominate, canopy largely intact.
Some spruce and fir below (100 to 300 years.
Stage 4-Canopy quite ragged.
Stage 5- Canopy, dominated by over-mature lodgepole pines, beginning to break up (over 300 years).
Yellowstone National Park 
