``As the day heats up, you'll get these reburns going out and thetrees dry out and they'll torch,'' said Forest Service spokesman EdChristian in Wyoming.
``We hope Mother Nature cooperates with us,'' said Mary Plumb ofthe federal Bureau of Land Management in Utah.
Record highs included 97 at Cheyenne, Wyo., and 100 at Denver,while Casper, Wyo., tied its record of 100.
That was Denver's fifthconsecutive day at 100 degrees or higher.
Fire crews were at work in Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico,Arizona, California and Washington.
Elsewhere, four big fires burnedin interior Alaska, one having charred an estimated 24,000 acres.
The fact that there are more acres burned this year, but fewerfires, ``means this year's fires are in very rugged, inaccessibleterrain, which makes them hard to fight,'' said Hartigan.
The largest fire in the Lower 48 states was the week-old DiamondPeak fire in Utah, which had burned 12,200 acres of forest and brushin an area 20 miles west of the Utah-Colorado border, just north ofInterstate 70.
High wind also was expected in northern California, where a2,500-acre fire near Janesville on the eastern slopes of the SierraNevada destroyed two mobile homes.
U.S. 395 between Milford andJanesville was closed.
Relentless winds first pushed the fire north, then south,prompting Sheriff Ron Jarrel to order the evacuation of a sparselypopulated area about a mile south of the fire line, Reider said.
Itwas unknown how many people were affected.
The chopper apparently was making a waterdrop when it crashed.
In the Sierra foothills near Oroville, north of Sacramento, a750-acre fire was contained Saturday after burning four homes, sixoutbuildings and six vehicles, and forcing about 150 residents toflee briefly Friday night, according to the California Department ofForestry.
Firefighters gained the upper hand on a trio of forest fires inColorado's drought-stricken mountains Saturday, but a new blaze ofan estimated 3,000 acres in grass and timber on the eastern plainshad crews scrambling to protect a subdivision in Elbert County.
Forest spokesman Ed Christiansaid the fire was about 50 percent contained by Saturday night andthat with some cooperation from the weather, crews should be able tocomplete their containment line by Monday.
Firefighters spent an eighth day Saturday battling thelightning-caused, 8,139-acre Divide fire 50 miles northeast ofSilver City in the Gila National Forest in southwestern New Mexico,U.S.
Forest Service officials said.
