Introduction: Rescuers crawled through collapsed homesand shops today looking for more victims of a tornado that carved a3-mile stretch of destruction, killing 17 people, injuring 463 andleaving 1,000 homeless.
``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in ablender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker BobCaraway, whose specialty is cave rescues.
He was among those calledout to help dig through rubble for survivors or the bodies of thedead.
The other tornadoes caused at least 19 injuries andfar-flung property damage.
Gov.
His spokesman, Terry Abbott, said aerialsurveys indicate the twister hopped along a 25-mile path, much ofit straight through Huntsville.
By this afternoon, severe thunderstorms were crossing theNortheast.
The National Weather Service put out a tornado watch forparts of Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York,all of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and parts of Massachusetts,Vermont and New Hampshire.
_ In West Virginia, high winds believed to be tornadoes sweptJefferson County early today, overturning trailers, blowing roofsoff homes and downing power lines, authorities said.
Four peoplewere injured, two seriously.
The tornado struck Huntsville with virtually no warningWednesday afternoon as the city's streets grew busy with theapproach of rush hour.
``It was like one big pop and that's wheneverything went.''
By then, it was already tearing up the city.
A watch means a tornado is considered possible, while a warningmeans a tornado is believed to exist.
Police Chief Richard Ottman initially put the number of dead at19, but his clerk, Kitty Whitworth, later said the death toll waslowered to 17 after police confirmed the count of bodies.
She saidpolice had no firm reports of people missing.
Most of the dead were in apartments, stores orcars.
``They're thankful to be alive and they're thankful theirfamilies are alive,'' he said, adding that the shelter had receivedcalls from around the country from worried relatives.
The tornado was Alabama's deadliest since a 1975 twister killed22 people in Birmingham, said Danny Cooper, state emergencymanagement director in Montgomery.
Along a highway near a destroyed apartment complex, cars wereflipped and smashed into telephone poles and crushed by trees.
Humana Hospital administrator David Miller said doctors haddifficulty reaching the hospital because of blocked roads.
Heavy overhead power lines ``started snapping just like a circusperformer would snap his whip,'' Carroll said.
Kenneth Lenhard had undergone an operation at the CrestwoodHospital on Wednesday and returned to his room about an hour beforea window in the next room blew out as the tornado passed.
``There wasn't anything I could do, so I covered my head,''Lenhard said.
The downtown Jones Valley Elementary School, the WaterfordSquare and adjacent Queensbury apartment complexes were reduced torubble.
Kindergarteners were the only pupils left at the school by thetime the twister hit.
The city is home to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and theArmy's Redstone Arsenal, but no serious damage was reported fromthe space agency or weapons testing center.
``Then we heard a large, loud, swirling and humming noise,'' herecalled.
I lived near a train track.
It did not sound like a train.
``I saw one 18-wheeler flip over.
The car infront of us was flipped about 100 yards, and the guy was thrown outof his passenger window and landed 50 feet from his car.
