Meanwhile, fears mounted that the fragile recovery of agriculture-related industries will be derailed by continuing lack of rain.
Concern that the drought could fuel inflation drove stocks and bonds sharply lower yesterday.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 37.16 points to close at 2094.24, while U.S. government bonds fell more than 1 1/2 points.
Grain and soybean futures continued their drought-driven rally.
We've already seen some increases in some products."
But he said the administration doesn't believe the drought will have "overall implications for the economy."
Clearly, we will have to appraise very carefully the desirability of using export enhancement funds at a time when (U.S.) supplies are unpredictable," Mr. Yeutter said.
But Mr. Yeutter said he would "vigorously" oppose any embargo on U.S. soybean exports.
Earlier this week, Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng took an equally adamant stand against such an embargo.
Hefty government subsidies on last year's strong harvests put a record amount of cash into farmers pockets.
Farm equipment makers say they are concerned that sales could suffer.
Realtors in rural areas say that land prices, which had just begun to turn around, may be affected.
"This is probably putting a damper on one of the most optimistic years in the last eight years," says Richard Hahn, president and chief executive of an Omaha, Neb.-based farm management concern.
In April, the price of good-quality Iowa farm land was one-third higher than it was a year earlier.
Now, with farmers in many Midwest states expecting smaller harvests this year, these businesses are seeing their new-found trade evaporating.
"People are borrowing minimal amounts."
Few in farming expect the drought to trigger an agricultural recession, although more farmers could go bankrupt because of it.
In Franklin, Tenn., implement dealer Larry Holt is slashing his fall orders by one-third, even though sales so far this year are up roughly 25%.
He expects sales for the rest of this year to drop 10% to 20% from the second-half of 1987.
Case, the farm implement-making unit of Tenneco Inc., is considering cutting production schedules if the drought continues through July.
Among rural banks, loan problems are expected to rise and profits to fall. "
"There are a lot of question marks right now."
Many rural lenders this spring were banking on farmers losing some of their post-farm crisis inhibitions about going into hock.
In Anadarko, Okla., bankers worry now that ranchers are going to make less money this year because crop damage is escalating the cost of feeding cattle. "
"Everybody has just kind of pulled in their horns," says Jim Frevert, vice president of Hertz Farm Management Inc., Nevada, Iowa.
A big drop in harvests this year could squeeze investors who had planned on good yields to help pay their real estate loans.
Among all the uncertainty, however, some are looking for a silver lining.
"I will be hurt a bit," says Mark Dadd, an economist who is buying a 420-acre farm in Missouri.
Some economists think high crop prices will spark more planting, which would benefit agribusiness, while others think farmers will start the next growing season more conservative.
"I don't see us getting on a late '70s bandwagon," says Mr. Drabenstott of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
"Both borrowers and lenders have developed pretty good memories."
The decision by Mr. Lyng, the secretary of agriculture, to allow hay-mowing for 30 days on Conservation Reserve Program land came as farmers and ranchers in North Dakota, Minnesota and other states continued to sell off livestock in response to shortages of hay and other forage crops.
Mr. Lyng's order covers counties where livestock-grazing and hay-mowing on so-called set-aside acres already has been authorized, and the drought's effects have been rated as "severe."
Every county in North Dakota meets these criteria.
The department said it won't allow livestock-grazing on land in the soil-conservation program, under which farmers are paid to take erodible acreage out of crop production.
