In eachcase, the government tries to prevent a mutually advantageoustrade: an employer hiring a low-productivity, hence, low-wageworker who is willing to work at that wage; a renter inducingan increase in the supply of housing by willingly paying ahigher price; and an electorate choosing a desiredrepresentative who is willing to serve.
What is going on here?One argument is that incumbent politicians have unfairadvantages in elections because of their ready access tocampaign funds, staff, mailing and travel privileges, mediapublicity, and so on.
Hence, the electorate is fooledsystematically into supporting incumbents even when they areinferior to their challengers.
This argument is similar tothe Galbraith-like view that big corporations with massiveadvertising budgets can consistently dupe their customersinto buying inferior products.
Supporters of free markets andthe capitalistic system reject this message because they havefaith in the self-interested consumer to discipline thecompanies that do not deliver the goods.
Advocates of thedemocratic electoral process ought to have similar confidencein the public.
Another argument is that a citizen Congress with itscontinuing flow of fresh faces into Washington would resultin better government than that provided by representativeswith lengthy tenure.
The counter-argument is that experienceis an important characteristic for legislators.
Eachviewpoint has some validity.
Presumably the best solution isto let the market decide, that is, to allow the electorate todetermine the proper balance between freshness andexperience.
Most of us would not want the government todetermine whether a familiar or a new brand of toothpaste ispreferable; why is a political representative different inthis respect?Many commentators bemoan the high tendency for incumbentsto be re-elected.
But if the electoral control process isworking, so that officeholders conform with the interests ofthe majority of their constituents, then the electoraterewards its representatives with re-election.
If we ever see a 50% re-election rate,then there really would be reason to worry.
The threat not to re-elect works only if the incumbent isinterested in another term, whether for his current or foranother office.
(It is interesting tonote, however, that Hamilton was not discussing term limitson the legislature, and was actually arguing against the termlimits on the chief executive that are contained now in the22nd Amendment.
Representativesaccumulate more power as they become more senior, partlybecause of better committee assignments and more staff andpartly because of increased familiarity with governmentofficials and institutions and with outside interest groups.
Yet thesame voters likely would have approved a proposal thatlimited the terms of all Congressional representatives, notjust those from Washington.
Changes in the seniority system may therefore be asuperior alternative to term limits.
If a representative'spower to favor his or her district did not vary withseniority, then voters would not have an excessive incentiveto re-elect incumbents.
Although the chances of success seem small, one wayto proceed would be to call the proposal the Civil RightsAmendment -- recent experience shows that calling something aCivil Rights Act helps to get it passed.
Greaterexperience may justify positions of more authority, and, therewards from seniority give Congress an efficient method tomotivate good behavior from junior members.
(Seven of these limits have been introduced since 1960.
The 22nd Amendmentreflected Congress's desire to shift the balance of poweraway from the executive, and notably the desire of aRepublican-dominated House and Senate to prevent the rise ofanother powerful Democratic president like FranklinRoosevelt.
Theanswer, if one holds constant geographical region and thelevel of per capita income in 1960, is that states with termlimits experienced slightly below average growth ofper-capita income over the last 30 years but were also alittle below average in the fraction of state product thatwent to state and local government expenditures.
Legislative term limits are less clear-cut and it is possibleto build a respectable case that favors such limits.
But itis unrealistic to think that the enactment of these limitswould lead to great improvements in the functioning ofgovernment and hence, in the performance of the economy.
