Consumers, politicians and environmentalists expressed their angerin a one-day ``Boycott Exxon'' campaign.
They also questionedsubsequent increases in gas prices.
In Anchorage, about 400 chanting and sign-waving protestersrallied in front of Exxon's Alaskan headquarters to urge a consumerboycott.
The oil company's cleanup strategy must gain Yost's approvalbefore being put into effect.
``The plan is very thin,'' he told a news briefing.
It was quite light, verythin.
There must have been a lot of figures there that I haven'tseen.
``Somebeaches are going to be sparkling, some beaches are going to be farfrom sparkling.''
Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner, who is to make hissecond trip to Alaska on Wednesday as overall coordinator for thecleanup, said he expected the size of the operation to double ortriple by the end of the month.
However, he said the cleanup, to be paid for by the oilindustry, could add $100 million to $500 million to Alaska'seconomy, which he said is more than the effect of the fishingindustry.
Exxon released a statement that called the boycott unjust.
ExxonPresident William D. Stevens said the company was ``turning heavenand Earth to set things right.''
About 300 miles from the spill site, an observer saw thousandsof dead birds in a wide tidal basin in the Hallo Bay area.
... You can't really tellwhat they are.
They're one big blob of oil,'' said Ray Bane,superintendent of Katmai National Park, about 275 miles southwestof Valdez.
``We found large oil debris washing and slopping up on ourshores.
``We saw eagles carryingoil-covered birds.
State and federal officials said the focus of the cleanup ismoving southwest, following the drifting oil along the AlaskaPeninsula through the Shelikof Strait east of Kodiak Island.
Oilhas tainted the coast at least as far as Chignik, 525 milessouthwest of Valdez.
In its proposal, Exxon said it wants to burn or bury the sludgerecovered in the cleanup, which may require exemptions from Alaskaenvironmental law.
But Bill Lamoreaux, the ranking state environmental officer atthe spill, said the laws would not be relaxed.
``The generalfeeling is that we would expect that they would comply with theenvironmental laws,'' Lamoreaux said.
U.S. Sens.
James Exon and Bob Kerrey, both Nebraska Democrats,called on U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to investigatepotential price gouging by the oil industry.
They noted that gasprices in Nebraska rose 20 percent from the first of March untilmid-April.
State attorneys general in Washington, Oregon and Idaho echoedthe call.
