Carbon particles indicatethe exhaust of a passing truck was the culprit.
And there are otherways to tell a fire was accidental.
``You eliminate all those causes, you're down to arson,'' saidDale Smallwood, a criminal investigator for Missouri's Mark TwainNational Forest.
A psychologist's study found economic and even aesthetic reasonswhy some people light woods aflame.
A total of 14,200 acres of the forest, which covers 1.5million acres mostly in southern Missouri, were burned during aspring fire season made more volatile by drought.
``It's probably 90 percent higher than the national average,''said Ron McDonald, Mark Twain's fire control officer.
Fires in other areas are morelikely to be caused by lightning or man's carelessness.
``I consider myself an Ozarkhillbilly,'' he said.
The Forest Service is charged with protecting wildlands, andbalancing recreational needs with commercial interests in timberand mineral resources.
Smallwood's job includes investigatingmarijuana growing in the forest, timber theft and theft of otherfederal property.
``Part of it is tradition,'' Smallwood said.
Subsistence farmers in the rural South who were interviewed byShea and his researchers claimed fire helped control ticks, snakesand disease and controlled the encroachment of trees on land wherethey wanted to graze cattle.
``Their ways are those of frontiersmen living in an arrestedfrontier,'' Shea wrote.
The Forest Service has attempted to counter the lore that canlead to burning.
Over the years, timber has been touted as a cash crop that is asworthy of protection as grassland.
``We had one case (in 1984) where two men went to Sunday schooland after school they started a fire with their Sunday schoolliterature,'' Smallwood said.
Still, the arsonist does not always fit the profile of a simplymisguided citizen.
``Part of the problem is people driving around drinking andshooting road signs,'' Smallwood said.
``When they get bored withthat, they set fires.
It's malicious mischief.
They could be mad at government, period.''
Then, ``fire is used as retaliation.''
``It's so senseless,'' he said.
``It just costs a lot of moneyto put these fires out and it's coming right out of our taxdollars.''
Last year,a judge ordered two arsonists to work weekends for the ForestService.
No.1, you usually don't have any witnesses.''
``We would have liked to have prosecuted someone in that case.
