Introduction: A controversial videotape being shown among activists nationwide shows Los Angeles police officers intentionally hurting the nonviolent demonstrators they are arresting.
His arm, contorted behind his back, finally snaps.
The law enforcement name for these techniques is "pain-compliance."
But opponents call the term a euphemism for torture.
Demonstrators have alleged police brutality at least since Freedom Riders launched their sit-down strikes in Alabama almost 30 years ago.
As a result, traditional political alliances have been turned topsy-turvy.
Other conservative lawmakers have echoed his concerns, and on Nov. 15, with little media attention, President Bush signed legislation withholding certain federal grants from cities whose police use excessive force.
"I think it's utter stupidity," Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates said.
all through the '60s, all through the '70s," Gates said.
He smiled.
"You didn't hear any Republicans complain then, did you?"
Reacting to one phase of the exam, a woman cadet knocked back an assailant's hand, backed up quickly and leveled her weapon at the man's chest, shouting: "Put your hands up, lock your elbows, spread your fingers."
Deadly force is one extreme among the techniques officers must choose from in confronting suspected lawbreakers, explained Sgt.
The least forceful tactic is a simple request -- "Would you do this?"
Another trick of the trade: the "mastoid lift," in which officers press the nerves along each side of the neck.
Demonstrated on recruits who had seated themselves like protesters on the Academy's playing field, each of these techniques worked promptly.
But while some Operation Rescue demonstrators use a standard civil-disobedience technique and "go limp" when asked to move, others link arms.
They become "human worm-balls" and make themselves tense, rendering standard compliance techniques ineffective, officers say.
So LAPD and other police forces around the country, including several in Orange County and the San Diego Police Department, began using a modified martial arts tool called a nunchaku -- now termed a "police control device" -- consisting of two 12-inch lengths of plastic connected by a length of nylon.
The gentlest twist triggered enough pain to make the recruit comply promptly.
Protesters are given every chance to move on their own.
"It's going to hurt.
That's what pain-compliance means."
But protesters in Los Angeles and elsewhere assert that the nunchakus and more conventional come-along holds produced not only agony while being applied, but lingering pain, broken bones, torn ligaments, and, in some cases, long-lasting nerve damage.
Nichols and other officers are suspicious of Operation Rescue's charges.
"The first time pressure is applied, most people fall to the ground," Nichols said.
"With Right-to-Lifers, you feel something's rotten in Denmark.
It's kind of like watching a movie where someone gets shot 10 times and keeps walking.
You say, something's wrong here."
Patrick E. McKinley of LAPD's Metro Division has worked at demonstrations by the Revolutionary Communist Party and the Jewish Defense League, and at protests for or against everything from apartheid to animal rights.
Nichols and others have alleged that some demonstrators simply take muscle relaxants to increase their tolerance -- a charge an Operation Rescue spokeswoman called "100% incorrect."
In either case, the results are dangerous, said McKinley.
"I'm no doctor.
But pain has a purpose.
It's telling you to stop doing what you're doing.
If you don't respond to pain, and it is applied with more force, injuries are possible. "
* In Pittsburgh, women claimed they were sexually molested by officers.
* In West Hartford, Conn., officers removed their badges and name tags -- purportedly to avoid cutting demonstrators -- and then allegedly hauled protesters away with come-along holds, by lifting them with sharp-edged plastic handcuffs, or with "crotch carries" in which a night stick is stuck between the protester's legs.
Jesus!
Implicit in the protesters' complaints is a sense that they have been betrayed by kindred spirits.
"Frankly, I lead a very middle-class life.
I've never been roughed up like that before.
Maybe I just got a little insight into what it was like to be a black demonstrating for civil rights."
A group called Pro-Life Police was formed, and a member testified that he had witnessed "real atrocities" by the LAPD.
For example, feminist lawyer Gloria Allred, never hesitant to criticize official abuses, said she believes police acted with professionalism last March, issuing fair warnings and acting only after demonstrators failed to comply.
What they are suffering in pain-compliance is a drop in the ocean compared to what we've endured in exercising our constitutional rights."
Chief Gates, an outspoken conservative, does not bask in this new-found support.
In fact, the emotional volatility of the abortion issue has shaken the way many think in the debate over police uses of force.
William B. Allen, a controversial Ronald Reagan appointee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, has similar views: "We like to value tolerance.
But you never know how tolerant you are until you're challenged on something you care about.
I don't want them concerned with abortions, nuclear freezes, saving the whales or whatever."
Even before the commission met, conservative lawmakers were joining Sen. Armstrong in lashing out against police pain-compliance tactics and pushing legislation to restrain them.
Rep. Robert Dornan (R-Garden Grove) read into the Congressional Record a column by William F. Buckley Jr. comparing the West Hartford demonstrations to civil rights demonstrations in Alabama three decades ago: "It is hard to believe that Bull Connor, directing white redneck policemen, caused more brutality in the treatment of blacks than was caused by the police of West Hartford in their treatment of members of Operation Rescue."
Los Angeles received almost $56 million in such grants in fiscal year 1989.
The Justice Department already investigates charges of police abuse, Gates pointed out.
Carol Sobel, staff attorney for the Los Angeles Chapter of the ACLU, shares Gates' assessment that the government acted in this case because conservative lawmakers were sympathetic to the anti-abortion cause.
But, unlike Gates, she believes that using pain-compliance against any nonviolent demonstrator is often "barbaric," and she supports restraints on the police.
Still, she believes the new measure will help assure "that the cost of demonstrating in this town doesn't escalate.
I just hope conservatives remember that it includes everyone."
Jim Cady in the Times Editorial Library assisted in the research for this article.
