Introduction:   Simply put , the question was who should becounted as a person and who, if anybody, should not.
That happened because in the arithmetic of congressionalreapportionment, every question becomes complex, contentious andpolitically charged.
Therecould be enough of them to shift seats away from at least fivestates to Sun Belt states with large numbers of illegal residents.
Nobody is certain because counting illegal aliens is a hard thingto do, given the fact that they don't want to be spotted by thegovernment.
Then again, the Census Bureau maintains that notincluding them, and still coming up with an accurate 1990 populationcount, would be even more difficult.
After the 1980 census, the government estimated that there were2.57 million people in the United States illegally.
There were otherguesses, some of them far higher.
Sen. Richard Shelby, D-Ala., proposed, and won, the immigrationbill amendment that is supposed to exclude illegal aliens from theredistricting process.
It does not come with instructions, so the department wouldhave to figure out how.
Shelby's amendment says only that the secretary is to ``make suchadjustments in total population figures as may be necessary, usingsuch methods and procedures as the secretary determines feasible andappropriate'' to keep illegal aliens from being counted incongressional reapportionment.
With 435 seats in the House, everyrepresentative gained by a state is a representative lost by another.
``Theframers of the Constitution intended to count all persons,'' Kennedysaid.
Neither the original article nor the amendment mentionscitizenship in connection with apportionment, although the term``citizens'' is used in some other provisions.
Opponents of theamendment said that showed the authors of both documents wantedeverybody counted for purposes of apportionment.
That came later, with immigration restrictions that began in 1875.
``It does violate the constitutional principleof one man, one vote.''
Children can't vote, but they count, too.
The amendment was adopted after the Senate voted 58 to 41 againsta move to reject it, and 56 to 43 against scuttling it asunconstitutional.
``Somebody is going to challenge it...'' he said.
``Then, for the first time, we will let the SupremeCourt of the United States decide something that we need an answerto ...'' Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist forThe Associated Press, has reported on Washington and nationalpolitics for more than 25 years.
End Adv PM Thurs July 20
