Introduction:BETHESDA, Md.
-- Eva Mitrova, a visiting researcher at theNational Institutes of Health here, unrolls a map of hernative Czechoslovakia and points to Poltar, a village wherethe strange deaths started.
Soon hishandwriting changed.
His vision blurred.
Gradually he lostcoordination, sometimes jerking uncontrollably.
A few monthslater, he died.
Under a microscope, parts of his brain,riddled with little holes, looked like a sponge.
The plot revolves around a family of braindiseases, probably variations of a single disorder, calledspongiform encephalopathy.
Then, over a few months, motor control bucklesand cognition crumbles.
Victims then die quickly, usuallywithin a year.
Now, after decades of detective work, medical sleuthsappear to be closing in on the molecular culprits behind thedisease.
Their dogged pursuit won't nail a public-healthenemy No.
The work alsopromises basic science breakthroughs.
Spongiform researchalready has raised questions about a cornerstone of biologyand spawned a Nobel Prize.
The uncanny nature of the disorder sometimes gripsscientists with a kind of obsessive fascination, notes NIHresearcher D. Carleton Gajdusek.
A few weeks ago, the first confirmed case of mad cowdisease outside Britain turned up in Switzerland.
U.S. meatproducers have reason to be anxious about this because theincidence of scrapie has been rising in American sheep sincethe mid-1980s, says Richard Marsh, a University of Wisconsinscrapie expert.
When Dr. Mitrova, a researcher at a Bratislava medicalinstitute, heard of the unusual cluster of cases, she decidedto investigate.
Thearea's equivalent of chicken soup for colds is sheep brainfried in onions.
Against all odds, CJD has struck again and again in the sameregion, called Slovakia -- 69 times since 1975, mainlygrouped in two areas.
Mitrova.
She has found evidence of scrapie in the area'ssheep.
Now villagers there call CJD "our sheep disease.
Thatyear, the NIH's Dr. Gajdusek, then a young scientist castingabout for big questions, planned a trip to Papua New Guineato visit a friend.
He never arrived.
Fascinated, he dropped everything, plunged intothe backwoods with a local doctor and took charge ofinvestigating the affair, to the great annoyance ofAustralian authorities then overseeing the area.
"Gajdusek .
He swapped axes and salt for autopsy rights,dissecting one victim with a carving knife by lantern-lightin a native hut during a howling storm, according to hisletters home.
The cause remained elusive.
Two years later, William Hadlow, a U.S. veterinarian, sawa picture of one of the kuru brains in a medical journal andwas struck by its spongy appearance.
Another link fell into place when Igor Klatzo, anNIH scientist, noticed kuru brains resembled ones from CJDvictims.
The discoveries confirmed along-suspected connection: The kuru outbreak sprang from aFore mourning ritual, in which relatives ate their deceasedkin's lightly cooked, and often kuru-infected, brains.
But the infectious agent continued to baffle scientists.
It somehow could hide in the brain for decades withoutcausing the usual signs of infection, such as fever.
And why did theagent sporadically appear in people with no known exposure?It seemed like "biological spontaneous combustion," says NIHresearcher Paul Brown.
Many scientists nowbelieve it's the culprit.
But their theory entails a biologically weird premise:that the altered protein replicates itself without the aid ofgenetic material, the basis of all known reproduction.
Ifthey're right, such self-replicating proteins might berepresentatives of an ancient twilight zone between life andnonlife-evolution's bridge between molecules and microbes.
A hot question: Does theamyloid in Alzheimer's disease form similarly?All this, however, doesn't explain what happened after Dr. Brown baked isolates of the disease agent for an hour at 680degrees Fahrenheit, a temperature that melts proteins.
Heinjected the ashy residue into animals' brains, expectingnothing to happen.
The results may be "verydisquieting," he says, to British farmers, who have beenburning and burying mad cow corpses.
Still, Dr. Brown and other scientists aren't much worriedabout mad cows because their animal studies show spongiformdisease is very hard to transmit orally.
Eating huge doses ofthe agent is required.
Kuruvictims apparently consumed similar mega-doses.
And so mayhave Max.
Now more than 10 British cats have diedof it, suggesting brains from infected sheep or cows got intocat food.
Meanwhile, yet another spongiform outbreak has occurred,this time among northeastern Pennsylvanians.
The discovery began when the scientistsferreted out a genetic defect in two U.S. brothers who haddied of CJD.
In itself, that was nothing new.
But Dr. Brown's excitement grew when three other,unrelated CJD victims were found to carry the same geneticdefect.
Drs.
Brown and Gajdusek knew just where to look forsuch people.
They grabbed a plane for Czechoslovakia.
Essentially, we're stuckwith another paradox," he adds.
