``It's like a watch spring.
I think we're approaching thatbreaking point,'' said Van Hayden, 25, a student who says policebeat him at the hotel.
There will be no tolerance forthat type of inexcusable behavior.''
Since former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, then a35-year-old mayor running for the U.S. Senate, electrified the 1948Democratic National Convention with his historic speech in supportof civil rights, Minneapolis has been viewed as a liberal,progressive city.
``I think this city has to wake up.
That is real tricky,'' Hayden said.
``Ifwe get preoccupied with the image of the city, we're not going to beable to thoroughly address the problems we're facing.''
City Council voted last week to study the problem.
``There are bad apples in every bunch and the Minneapolis PoliceDepartment is no exception,'' said Councilwoman Sayles Belton.
Lloyd Smalley, 71, and Lillian Weiss, 65, were killed Jan. 25 ina fire that started after police hurled a stun grenade into theirapartment, where others also lived, during a drug raid.
No one conducting the raid knew the elderly people were livingthere, said Laux.
A grand jury decided not to bring charges againstany officers, but an FBI investigation is continuing.
In the hotel scuffle, police said they responsed to a call of aloud party.
Partygoers alleged that officers used the term``nigger,'' and beat some of those arrested.
Laux said his officershave denied using racial names and said protesters lied about thenumber of people receiving medical attention following the arrests.
Gleason Glover, president of the Minneapolis Urban League, whichworks for interracial cooperation, said police racism has been aproblem since he took over the league position 21 years ago.
Allegations of police misconduct currently are reviewed by apanel appointed by the mayor.
The panel can only makerecommendations.
Laux said the 750-member department, which includes 62 minoritymembers and 68 white women, will begin cultural awareness trainingfor all officers, probably this fall.
``But it must be thoughtful and be doneby the right people.
