While short-term measures may ease the immediate budgetary pressures, morefundamental reforms will be needed if the welfare state is not to underminethe economic performance that has underpinned its enormous expansion sincethe second world war.
Reform of national welfare systems to bring costs under control is now onthe political agenda throughout the OECD, as countries struggle to rein ingovernment spending.
Thebiggest element in this growth has been the cost of pensions, healthcare,unemployment benefits and family support.
Healthexpenditure also doubled, from 3.9 per cent to 7.8 per cent.
Expenditure has risen rapidly in recent decades,more than doubling its average share of GDP in OECD countries since 1960.Pensions typically account for about a quarter of the increase in publicexpenditure over this period.
The growth is largely attributable to three factors:The increase in coverage as pension schemes introduced after the secondworld war mature.
The rise in the number of elderly people.
Countries such as Spain, Irelandand the Netherlands have been extending their public healthcare systems toprovide universal coverage.
The ageing of the population has alsocontributed to rising costs, though not as much as for pensions.
But it has also helped to push up the budget for sickness and invaliditybenefits, which often offer an escape route into early retirement for olderworkers.
For example, governments have become much lesswilling to offer improvements in pensions.
Moves are afoot in countries suchas Germany and Italy to raise the pension age.
Automatic indexation ofpensions to earnings has been weakened in Germany and ended altogether inthe UK for the basic flat-rate pension.
Although there are considerabledifferences between national health systems, healthcare reforms in countriessuch as the UK and the Netherlands are increasingly converging on modelsthat use competition and price incentives to control costs.
Activelabour market policies have been introduced to promote a return toemployment.
The most important of these is demography.
Only halfway through the 21stcentury will the number of over-65s peak, at about 190m.
Thestandard measure for this is the age dependency ratio, the population over65 as a percentage of the population aged 15-64.
Overall, the OECD estimates that the pension burden could double over thenext 50 years.
In practice, increasing pensions in line with prices might be difficult tosustain if earnings rose faster.
The growing gap between pensioners andthose still at work that would result could be politically unacceptable.
Experts differ on whether increased longevity inevitably means more medicalcare: while more might be required for the very elderly, less might beneeded for younger people as chronic diseases become less common.
Other changes in social structure are also pushing up the demands on thewelfare state.
In some countries, the increasehas been relatively moderate - 20 per cent or less in countries such asFrance, Japan and Switzerland.
In the US it is one infour families.
Added to concerns over demography and social change are fears over theincrease in unemployment levels across the OECD.
Over the past two decades,jobless levels have risen during recessions but not fallen back to the sameextent in the following recovery period.
This ratchet effect has worried the Group of Seven leading industrialcountries sufficiently for an employment summit to be hosted by PresidentClinton in the coming months.
Continuing rises in the base level ofunemployment would further undermine countries' ability to pay for theirwelfare states.
Germany, theUK, France, Italy and the US are among countries that have already raisedtax and social security contribution levels.
However, the scope for such increases is limited by voters' reluctance topay higher taxes.
Where the cost of welfare is jointly funded by employers -as in Germany - higher contributions are also increasingly resisted bybusiness, which fears the consequences for international competitiveness ofhigher costs.
In a global economy, no country can long afford to burdenbusiness with higher welfare costs than its neighbours.
An alternative response to cost pressures would be further increases inborrowing to fund the welfare state.
But that would also have deleteriouseffects, according to the OECD.
Average government debt in OECD countrieshas risen from 23 per cent of GDP in 1979 to 44 per cent in 1992.Without either tax rises or cuts in welfare budgets, current welfarespending plans could increase debt ratios on average by 90 percentage pointsover the next 40 years, according to one OECD study.
It says this is 'asituation which most would think unsustainable'.This is why the OECD's half-yearly Economic Outlook repeatedly stresses theimportance of controlling welfare spending in improving economicperformance.
The OECD's immediate priorities for reform include charges forthe use of some welfare services and greater competition to increase theefficiency of those services.
Tackling these longer-term pressures will require more than tinkering withcharges and efficiency drives in welfare services.
Significant cuts in benefit levels, for example, may be needed - includinggreater targeting of benefits on the most needy.
User charges could becomeincreasingly widespread, especially for the better-off.
And the demandsput on the welfare state might be eased by encouraging more privateprovision of pensions and healthcare.
Measures such as these would fundamentally change the nature of the welfarestate, however.
From providing support 'from the cradle to the grave', itwould become a safety net for those who could not afford to provide forthemselves.
But a new glue will beneeded over the next 50 years if advanced economies are to pass beyond thewelfare state.
