Though federal investigators were looking into a number of possible causes for the crash, which occurred shortly after takeoff, engine failure appeared to be a likely culprit.
The accident, the second-deadliest ever in the U.S., could have a broad range of effects on the airline industry regardless of the specific causes, aviation specialists said.
Unlike the recent near-misses, the Detroit accident doesn't appear related to air-traffic control problems.
Even so, some congressional aides believe there will be a "spillover" effect, and that all aviation safety issues will now get closer scrutiny.
"This one is going under the microscope."
Added a Senate Commerce Committee staff member: "Delays and other consumer concerns will end up in the back seat."
Officials said that the aircraft's flight recorders, which record cockpit conversations, had been found in wreckage that extended over half a mile.
The MD-82 jet, which has a good safety record, is designed to be able to take off and land even if one engine fails.
In addition to a large fuel load for the flight to Phoenix, Ariz., the flight was jammed with passengers.
There were 153 people on a plane with 143 passenger seats.
The extras included six crew members, two babies who were being held by passengers and two Northwest employees riding on two of the plane's jump seats.
Late last night, the Associated Press reported that the girl was identified by her grandfather.
The engine, a JT8D-217A, was shut down, and the plane landed without further trouble.
The board recommended that the FAA order inspections of the JT8D engines to detect any pin fractures and to replace existing ones with improved pins.
The board said similar incidents involved Pacific Southwest Airlines and Muse Airlines.
In its April report, the National Transportation Safety Board warned that "many" of the 330 MD-80 series airplanes operated by 12 U.S. and 14 foreign airlines world-wide "are potential candidates" for engine failure.
In others, airlines have made changes, based on a Pratt &amp; Whitney service bulletin, to reduce the risk of pin failure.
FAA officials at the crash scene wouldn't speculate on the reasons for the crash or comment on the plane's engines.
He stressed that it was too early to draw any firm conclusions.
Among other things, the accident has focused attention on its recent service problems as well as discord among its workers.
The airline early yesterday denied that its labor troubles may have played a role in the crash.
Such concerns arose following reports of a work slowdown by Northwest mechanics.
In January, the Federal Bureau of Investigation began investigating incidents of alleged tampering with Northwest planes in Minneapolis.
The MD-82 that crashed was a former Republic jet that Northwest acquired as part of the merger.
The two emergency landings that involved the jetliner, number N312RC, took place in Minneapolis and San Francisco.
A Northwest spokesman said the engines involved in those two incidents had since been replaced by other JT8D-200 series engines.
Then they "saw a blue flash from the left engine," Mr. Leyden said.
"The left wing hit the ground, and the aircraft burst into flames," according to the controllers' account.
In one such incident, in September 1983, falling debris from an engine caused fire damage to several homes around John Wayne International Airport in Orange County, Calif.
Later inspection revealed extensive turbine damage to the engine, the FAA report said.
Why the Northwest airliner failed to make the climb and whether it was carrying too much weight will be subjects for federal investigators, he said.
Congress is expected to act on a half-dozen major aviation bills this fall.
Staff members now expect those bills to attract new measures aimed at improving safety.
"Aviation is going to be a hot topic," said an aide to Sen. Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.).
For example, Sen. Byrd and Sen. Ernest Hollings (D., S.C.), chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, have already drawn up legislation that would require small planes to be equipped with altitude-reporting devices at hundreds of airports across the U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D., N.J.), chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Transportation, predicted that the accident will "accelerate movement by the Congress and the Transportation Department to do whatever can be done -- either by hiring more maintenance inspectors or reducing air traffic to meet the capacity of the system, to reduce the chances of future accidents."
Sunday's crash was the first time in 24 years that passengers were killed in an accident involving a Northwest plane.
In March, a commuter plane affiliated with Northwest crashed in Detroit, killing nine people.
