Introduction: Mother Nature conspired against this struggling marathon Sunday, serving up balmy, windy weather and wilting both the men's and women's fields.
Temperatures during the Old Style/Chicago marathon hovered in the mid-60s, with 53% humidity.
It was the slowest winning time in this race since 1982.
By comparison, last year's race was 30 degrees cooler at the start.
Most distance runners prefer temperatures in the 40s, with cloud cover.
The race conditions were simply more bad luck for the 12th running of Chicago's marathon, which has been fighting for respectability since losing its sponsor in 1986 and staging no race in 1987.
That developed, at points, Sunday, as about 8,000 runners started at Daley Plaza downtown and wended their way through city streets.
A pack of five men took off fast, maintaining a 2:09 pace at nine miles.
Those early leaders: El-Mostafa Nechchadi of Morocco, Don Janicki of Colorado, Gerardo Alcala of Mexico, Carlos Montero of Spain and Gabriel Kamau of Kenya.
They did the early work against the wind, while a second pack hovered 20 seconds behind.
Davies-Hale had been among those who had cagily stayed back, going with a more conservative approach.
"I was concentrating on running five-minute miles," he said.
He accomplished that, almost exactly.
His time works out to 5:00.8 mile splits.
The two quickly went in different directions -- Binns falling back (he eventually dropped out) and Davies-Hale moving up.
Ed Eyestone was the first U.S. finisher in fourth, 2:14:57.
In the women's race, Weidenbach had not been the favorite and she agreed with that handicapping.
Then, the heat from the sun and the perceptible heat of Weidenbach constantly gaining did her in.
They shared some water, then Weidenbach tossed aside the water bottle and put on a surge that left O'Brien flat.
It was also where dozens of her family members and friends were posted.
Even the 2:28 is respectable -- only five U.S. women have run under 2:30.
"I guess when you are having a good day, nothing is going to get you down," she said.
Davies-Hale, a former plumber from Rugeley, Straffordshire, seemed bemused by the attention and nonplussed that he had just won $50,000 in prize money.
"I'll still do the odd washing machine .
Davies-Hale, 27, came to the United States in 1985 and settled in Boulder, Colo., the nation's unofficial running center.
He was a 1984 Olympian in the steeplechase and, on the advice of others, moved up to 5,000 and 10,000 meters.
"I've already had a great track season," Davies-Hale said.
Marathon Notes Race organizers insist that this race is at a world-class level, especially pointing to the world's richest purse.
That may be so, but all major marathons have drug testing and Chicago has none.
Men's and women's winners won $50,000, second place won $30,000 and third place $20,000.
Ann Cody Morris won the women's wheelchair race in 1:58:51.
