On Friday nights now, hundreds of patrons pour into theclub to swig "Earthquake shooters" and sign up to win Dec. 3Earthquake Escape Packages to the Bahamas or Hot Springs,Ark.
Shaken, thousands of people arecrowding into earthquake survival classes.
In Missouri and Arkansas, some schools and businesses haveannounced plans to close in early December.
Entrepreneurs arehawking quake insurance, survival kits and gas-line safetygadgets.
Some people are planning to flee.
"You can't run fromeverything," says Tammy McCormick, a nurse in Blytheville,Ark.
But it seems stupid tostay on a fault line with a prediction like this.
"Everybody talks about the San Andreas fault in California.
In 1811 and 1812, along a120-mile zig-zag formation called the New Madrid fault, aseries of quakes ravaged the Midwest.
Researchers estimatethose earthquakes ranked stronger than 8 on the RichterScale, which hadn't been invented yet.
Church bells rang as far away as Boston.
Chimneys crumbledin Cincinnati.
In the next 10years, experts warn, the area has a 33% chance of a quakemeasuring 7.1.
New Madrid, Mo., thefault's namesake, draws tourists to a museum with exhibits onthe 19th century devastation.
Iben Browning, a 72-year-old scientist, predictedOctober's Bay Area quake a week before it happened, saypeople who heard him speak to the Equipment ManufacturersInstitute.
Mr. Browning, who has a Ph.D. in physiology, genetics andbacteriology, writes a climate newsletter out of New Mexico.
He bases his forecasts on tidal forces caused by thepositions of the sun and the moon -- an old theory, criticssay, that doesn't wash. On Dec. 3, those forces are expectedto be at a 27-year high.
Mr. Browning says that will exertpressure that could trigger faults already ripe to fail.
Skepticism abounds.
But Mr. Browning shouldn't be written off so quickly, saysSoutheast Missouri State's Mr. Stewart, who recently spentfour days with Mr. Browning. "
He has a methodology that candetermine, plus or minus a window of a day or two, anenhanced probability of a volcano or an earthquake in certainlatitudes," says Mr. Stewart.
If one is a business consultant,they don't pay you for being wrong.
Salespeople from aMemphis company pop up at survival seminars with a device(for $259 and up) that turns off gas lines when a quake hits.
One says, "I'm staying," the other, "I'mleaving.
(pop: 24,314), tucked amid vast flat farmland, right atthe corner of the Arkansas, Tennessee and Missouri borders.
Says JimmyConnell, plant superintendent, "It's going to be a ghost townaround here.
For fiveyears, most of his classes were lightly attended.
Now hisphone-answering machine says he is almost completely bookedthrough October.
With his boomingvoice, Mr. Edwards lays out a grim scenario: "One hundred andfifty thousand dead in Memphis instantly -- instantly.
You have to be prepared to take complete care ofyourself for 24 hours to two weeks.
You may be five to sixmonths without power.
"After the seminar, two elderly sisters, both widows, spliton what to do.
But her sister, HalliePeterson, 83, wants to stay with their nephew in Mississippi.
School districts in Earle and Wilson, Ark., have announcedclosings around Dec. 3.
Some schools practice earthquakedrills, while others sponsor cake sales to buy survival kitsfor classrooms, with items like blankets, flashlights andradios.
In 11 years of studying predictionmethods, the panel has found no bona fide approach.
"But this one," says Randall Updike, the executivesecretary, "has created such chaos in the mid-continentregion that we felt we had to give our advice."Mr.
Browning says he is tentatively booked to give a talkin Minneapolis on Dec. 3 and he doesn't plan to go there viaSt.
Louis.
That will kill more people than earthquakes.
