He got out of those blocks like a caged lion," Lewis said in an interview Sunday at the Los Angeles Marathon, where he was representing a sponsor.
"I said, 'Look, I don't know what he is taking or what he is doing, but he is doing something.'
" Now Lewis has been implicated in an alleged sabotage of Johnson's drug test, which returned a positive result for the banned anabolic steroid stanozolol.
At a Canadian inquiry into drug use in sport Monday at Toronto, Charlie Francis, a Canadian sprint coach, testified that Johnson might have drunk contaminated beer before a urinalysis.
Francis based his theory on the fact that Johnson took the steroid furazabol three weeks before the Games, not the difficult-to-detect stanozolol.
Francis said that two witnesses told him that the stranger had spoken with Lewis in another area of the waiting room.
Any allocation or innuendo that Carl Lewis tampered with Ben Johnson's drink or sample is ludicrous," said David Greifinger, Lewis' attorney.
"These sound like the last acts of desperate men who know they've committed wrong and see no other way out other than to continue to lie and to fabricate stories. "
By continuing their present course of action they are just embarrassing themselves further."
Lewis could not be reached for comment Monday.
Though Johnson's gold medal and Seoul world-record time were both revoked, his world mark of 9.83 seconds stands.
Lewis said Sunday that officials of the International Amateur Athletics Federation should disallow Johnson's world record from Rome because Francis has testified his sprinter took drugs before the World Championships.
Lewis also contended that Francis' testimony painted a false picture as to why Johnson would take performance-enhancing drugs.
According to testimony, since 1981 Johnson has taken such drugs as furazabol, stanozolol and the human growth hormone, which is taken from the pituitary glands of human cadavers or can be taken in synthetic form.
They wanted to beat people.
That's why they got on drugs."
"There are athletes who do have a problem.
I've been around it too long."
Lewis, however, refused to implicate any of his colleagues.
But Lewis defended Evelyn Ashford, a world-class sprinter who was implicated as a steroid user in Francis' testimony last week.
That's going to happen.
I don't think that will hurt her image because Evelyn is clean and she always stood for being clean.
In finishing second at the Olympics, Lewis set a U.S. record of 9.92 seconds.
Even before Lewis replaced Johnson as the gold-medal winner two days after the race, the U.S. Olympian said he was happy with his result.
It didn't ease the pain of not winning and feeling he (Johnson) was on drugs.
Lewis called for Johnson to also become a role model.
"He needs to stand up and say, 'Don't do it.
The biggest thing about drug use is denial.
Somebody takes cocaine because they want to get high.
Some people take steroids because they want to run faster.
It's the same thing.
You're trying to cheat somehow."
If anybody gets what they deserve in track and field, it's me.
I make the most money, I get the appearances.
But I still believe that through it all I want to help every single person whether they make $50 a meet or near what I make."
Lewis said their philosophy was inspired by the late Dr. Martin Luther King, who once said it is important to make such sacrifices. "
Lewis asked.
"I feel if I can't sacrifice myself for the betterment of other people in track and field, well, then I cannot leave a legacy that will be remembered."
