The biggest oil spill in U.S. history created a slick aboutseven miles long and seven miles wide in Prince William Sound.
TheCoast Guard said only Reef Island and the western edge of BlighIsland had been touched by the slick.
Initial reports indicated 270,000 barrels had spilled.
``What we have here is a major environmental catastrophe,'' saidone oil spill expert, Richard Golob of Boston, publisher of GolobOil Pollution Bulletin.
Golob said cleanup equipment at the site was ``grosslyinadequate'' but added that even under ideal circumstances cleanupefforts would not have significantly reduced the spill's impact.
``And during that transit, undoubtedly a large stretch ofshoreline will be contaminated,'' he said.
Wieliczkiewicz said a boom was placed around the Exxon Valdezand the Exxon Baton Rouge to help contain oil around the vessels.
Kelso said the efforts shouldhave been under way in five hours, but took much longer.
``You missthe opportunity right at the beginning and you've missed our bestopportunity to do something.''
Alyeska spokesman Chuck O'Donnel said he was satisfied with hiscompany's actions.
``I think our people did an excellent job,'' hesaid.
``The whole food chain could be affected by the spill,'' saidAlan Reichman, ocean ecology coordinator for the environmentalgroup Greenpeace, in Seattle.
``There's a high concentration of sea otter, waterfowl, seabirds and pink salmon in that area,'' said Steve Goldstein, aspokesman for the Interior Department in Washington.
``We feel that this should have been the easiest oil spill inthe world to clean up,'' said Riki Ott, chairman of theorganization's habitat committee.
Fishermen also take salmon and shellfishfrom the sound.
Last year, they were paid about $85 million fortheir catches, she said.
The Port of Valdez remained closed to tanker traffic.
NorthSlope crude oil is shipped 800 miles through the trans-Alaska oilpipeline from Prudhoe Bay south to Valdez for shipment aboardtankers to refineries outside Alaska.
The vessel's captain, Joseph Hazelwood, has worked for Exxon for20 years, at least 10 as a ship's master.
It was unclear if a pilotwas aboard the Exxon Valdez when it grounded.
Steven McCall said National TransportationSafety Board investigators are expected to arrive Sunday to takeover the accident probe.
He said one or more blood-alcohol tests were administered afterthe grounding, but he said he didn't know know how many people weretested or the results.
McCall said the tests routinely areadministered in marine accidents involving federal jurisdiction.
The Coast Guard issued a statement late Saturday that McCall hassubpoenaed the ship's master and two crew members.
The subpoenas require them to make themselves available to NTSBinvestigators arriving Sunday.
The Coast Guard said the supoenaswere routine.
Up to 10.7 million gallons of oil was lost on Nov. 1, 1979, whenthe tanker Burmah Agate collided with another ship in GalvestonBay, Texas.
However, that oil burned as well as spilled.
The largest tanker spill in history resulted from the July 19,1979, collision off Tobago of the supertankers Atlantic Empress andAegean Captain, in which 300,000 tons _ more than 80 milliongallons _ of oil was lost.
