With a system they call ``revolutionary justice,'' they havebanned drug abuse, prostitution, homosexuality and thievery from thevillages they control.
``Two years ago you could not travel the roads without being heldup, but the `companeros' put an end to that,'' said cab driver DavidNicolas, referring to the guerrillas by the Spanish term forcomrades.
``They killed a few bandits and the rest got the message.''
The same shopkeepers complainbitterly about the local police who take what they want without everoffering to pay.
In a nation where economic chaos reigns and few laws arerespected, the Shining Path is setting down clear rules and makingthem stick.
Paul Feeley, aCanadian Roman Catholic priest working in Aucayacu, 255 milesnortheast of Lima.
In late July four young homosexual men who rendezvoused at abridge a few miles outside Tingo Maria, 35 miles south of here, wereset upon and killed by the rebels.
Their bodies were dumped into theriver.
A few months earlier the rebels executed eight youths near TingoMaria for smoking cigarettes laced with semi-refined cocaine.
Violators are warned only once.''
Villagers say they are told, ``The revolution has a thousand eyesand a thousand ears.''
In the bleak Andean highlands, where the rebelslaunched their insurgency in May, 1980, they have slain thousands ofpeasants in attacks on villages they viewed as traitors to the rebelcause.
Although they prohibit drug consumption, the guerrillas defendcoca production as an important source of income for the peasants.
Their only condition is that the semi-refined coca paste be sent outof Peru.
People in the Upper Huallaga appear to accept Shining Path'ssocial order.
``When thegovernment began trying to wipe out coca, police came and mistreatedpeople.
Even top government officials in Lima saythere is much truth to the complaints.
He gets off theplane from Lima with his hand out for a payoff.''
Official corruption is a problem throughout Peru, but in theHuallaga Valley it seems rampant.
A half dozen peasants complained in separate interviews that toobtain a farm loan from the local Banco Agrario they have to kickback 25 percent of the loan to bank officials.
And if you're a woman, also the bed.''
The Shining Path has been quick to kill local officials theydeemed to be corrupt, according to residents of the valley.
A lawyer in Tingo Maria said his caseload had dropped offdramatically because peasants no longer come into town to seekjustice.
``Formal justice here is ineffective, corrupt and timeconsuming,'' he said.
