According to information published in the Yugoslav newspapers, the Slovene Government could be addressing this issue soon.
The establishing of relations between the two states, the exchange of diplomatic representatives, and the abolition of the visa requirement for Yugoslav citizens are some of the topics to be considered.
The FRY Ministry of Foreign Affairs is denying that any official Slovene delegation came to Belgrade.
It is stated that this is rather a visit of businessmen, since these contacts have not been interrupted.
Commercial contacts The signals from the Slovene side are being received in Yugoslavia with reservations.
One could even say with distrust.
Yugoslav diplomats point out that Yugoslavia has not been officially recognized by Slovenia.
It is also true that Slovenia does not accept Yugoslavia on the international scene.
Official Belgrade has not forgotten "the extremist, anti-Serbian statements issued by Milan Kucan in Albania" or the moves made by Slovene statesmen who "instead of soothing the passions, stirred them up, always to Serbia's disadvantage."
After reporters remarked that this relatively negative attitude might negate the unofficial signal from Ljubljana, a Yugoslav diplomat said: "We do not think that there is only one opinion in Slovenia about Yugoslavia.
Slovenia is the former Yugoslav republic that made the greatest effort to harm the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
I am now speaking about the official Slovene attitude, not about the attitudes of all the politicians, and especially not about the attitudes of the Slovene people."
Diplomatic Pirouettes At that time the press carried statements made by Milan Kucan and Lojze Peterle that unquestionably represented a shift in policy toward Belgrade.
At the beginning of December 1993, Mr. Peterle, the Slovene minister of foreign affairs, made that attitude concrete in a letter to Warren Christopher, the U.S. secretary of state, in which he wrote: "A possible removal of the sanctions against Yugoslavia is being fully considered since the aims for which they were introduced have not been achieved....
The European Union initiative makes us hope that the situation in the Balkans can be solved."
[Box, p 7]Jovanovic: "Slovenia Must Excuse Itself"  " In order to enter the process of normalization of relations with Slovenia, certain conditions must be fulfilled first," Vladislav Jovanovic, FRY minister of foreign affairs, said in a statement for POLITIKA, and added: "First it is necessary for Slovenia to excuse itself for the rude and impertinent move it made a year ago in refusing the Yugoslav offer of recognizing Slovenia.
Apart from that, Slovenia must stop challenging the continuity of Yugoslavia as a state.
In addition, Slovenia supports the lifting of the arms embargo on the Bosnia- Herzegovina Muslims.
There are many situations that prove that Slovenia has a hostile attitude toward Yugoslavia.
On the contrary, while we lived together, we had excellent relations.
That is why our surprise was great when the turnaround occurred.
Yugoslavia is interested in good relations with all of its neighbors -- old and new alike.
Slovenia is no exception.
Official Slovenia should find ways and means to end this hostility.
