Introduction:   John Hatch, founder of the non-profit Foundationfor International Community Assistance, promotes village banking toencourage private enterprise in the Third World.
``I had my calculator out and Iwas sketching this thing and I was doing numbers, and I arrived inLa Paz with a full-blown concept.''
The series of loans, starting at $50, is renewable over threeyears to a ceiling of $300, allowing recipients to reach a level atwhich they can qualify for commercial credit.
Village banks are operating in Mexico, Haiti,Thailand, Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica, Bolivia, Peru and ElSalvador.
What Hatch foresees is a body blow to world poverty throughbootstrap economics.
He says its impetus was, and remains, the thousands of childrenworldwide who die daily because of starvation, what he calls thesacrifice of ``probably our most precious resource.''
``We teach severely poor mothers how to create their ownself-managed bank, which provides them with self-employment loans,provides them with savings incentives and provides them with asupport group of mothers like themselves, so that they are allattacking change at the same time.''
Though he's come upwith some sophisticated economic tools, he's kept thehumanitarianism.''
Catholic Relief Services entered a five-year, $1 million jointventure a year ago with the U.S. Agency for InternationalDevelopment and the foundation to create 40 village banks inThailand.
They targeted microenterprise development through smallentrepreneurs, vendors, village market women, who in somedeveloping countries comprise up to 50 percent of the employment.
Capitalization for one bank typically will cost a sponsoringagency $5,000.
The women, when asked, speak of the greatest benefit in terms ofwhat Hatch calls ``empowerment perceptions.''
``They say things like, `Now I'm somebody,' or `My husbandrespects me more.'''
Hatch says theloans give them freedom to start their own investment projects inor near home.
She then contacts others to attend an organizing meeting.
``Forget the mayor, forget the priest, forget the chief,'' Hatchsays.
It might beselling produce, groceries, baked goods, raising chickens, sewingor craftwork.
In some countries, the repayment rate has been 100 percent.
``And yet within 16 weeks they'reall experts.
They just learn as they go.''
Women who join the bank screen members and elect their leadersfrom first-meeting attendees.
But at the same time, each woman has been depositing weekly savingsof at least 20 percent of the original loan.
The savings serve asincentive for subsequent loans by increasing the credit line eachtime, Hatch said.
Interest in village banking is mounting.
The United Nations has provided a $50,000 grant to research theeffects of women's empowerment through village banking on maternaland child health practices.
Rotary Club 100, a Phoenix organization, and a Rotary Club ofMexico City are in a joint venture, having funded five villagebanks in Guaymas, Mexico, with another four to be launched in theslums of Mexico City.
As for whether such a system could work in the United States,Rotary's Rupp says, ``Frankly, it's the only hope we have ofchanging the welfare system.''
