Introduction:Congress has been dismayingly inconsistent in its votingon gun-control legislation this year, first passing the BradyBill, then moving in the opposite direction by defeating aprovision to ban certain assault weapons and ammunition.
Butin one respect members of Congress are consistent: theydemand respect for our "constitutional right to own a gun.
In myopinion, it even provides a solid constitutional basis foreffective national legislation to regulate guns and gunowners.
A constitutional amendment calling for theprohibition of standing armies in time of peace was proposedby six state ratifying conventions.
.. "The purpose was to limit the power of the new Congress toestablish a standing army, and instead to rely on statemilitias under command of governors.
Soon after the First Congress met, James Madison, electedas a congressman from Virginia on the basis of such a pledge,proposed a number of amendments resembling yet different fromarticles proposed by states.
The right of the people to serve in the militia.
This militia amendment was referred to a congressionalcommittee, and came out of committee in this form:"A well regulated militia, composed of the body of thepeople, being the best security of a free state, the right ofthe people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; butno person religiously scrupulous shall be compelled to beararms.
The debate focused exclusively onthe conscientious objector provision.
Eventually thecommittee's version was narrowly approved.
But what about the private right "to keep and bear arms,"to own a gun for self-defense and hunting?
Isn't that clearlyprotected by the amendment?
Didn't just about everyone own agun in 1791?
Wouldn't that right go without saying?
Yes, ofcourse, it would go without saying, especially then whenthere were no organized police forces and when hunting wasessential to the food supply.
But such facts tell us almost nothing relevant to ourquestion.
There are uncountablenumbers of rights not enumerated in the Constitution.
All of them areconstitutionally subject to regulation.
Whenreporting for service, every militiaman was required toprovide a prescribed rifle or musket, and ammunition.
Requiring every gun owner to register with the NationalGuard (as we require 18-year-olds to register with theSelective Service) would provide the information about gunowners sought by the Brady and Staggers bills, and much more.
Standards could be set for purchase or ownership of guns, andpenalties could be established.
Americansnow own more than 200 million guns, and opinion polls showAmericans want gun control.
Why not avail ourselves of theSecond Amendment remedy?
