More than 150 metersand gauges track seismic activity, rock strain, crustal tilt, tidalmovements and ground water levels.
Trains will be stopped, traffic routed out of the area, stores closed andpupils let out of schools.
For prediction believers, it is a smallprice to pay, as Japan is one of the world's most earthquake-pronecountries.
Research was alsobeing taken seriously in the US, Russia and China.
The Suruga Trough, a deep submarine trench running just offshore, forms theboundary between two of the earth's tectonic plates.
Friction between these platescauses the area's earthquakes.
The Tokai section last ruptured in 1854.
Since then, optimism about prediction has faded.
Precursors are often only recognised as such after a large earthquake.
Andmany earthquakes occur without any identifiable precursor, even inretrospect.
There are also questions as to whether Japan's monitoring efforts arefocused in the right place.
Recent studies by seismologists at the Ministryof Construction have indicated the possibility of a significant quakeoccurring in the Izu area between Tokai and Tokyo.
The city is overdue for abig quake, according to several theories.
Historically, strain along theSuruga Trough has been released in infrequent large earthquakes, rather thannumerous small ones.
The evidence is that significant strain has accumulatedalong the fault since the region's last big earthquake.
Recognising precursors will still be difficult.
Mogi says they now believethat precursor patterns may be particular to each section of a fault.
Hesays if they knew what precursory phenomena occurred the last time thatsection of the fault slipped, in 1854, they would be able to predict thenext earthquake.
Instead, the six experts are watching for the rapid upliftof the crust on the westward side of the trough that preceded quakes alongadjacent sections of the fault in 1944 and 1946.
This all makes a successfulprediction a long shot.
Aside from the Tokai effort, scientists outside the programme are disturbedthat it is so generously funded and has so little to show.
Prediction research elsewhere withered as scientists who could not convincereview committees of the scientific merit of their research lost theirfunding.
But, in effect, the budget is divided among researchersand institutions in the same proportions each year.
High public expectations are coming back to haunt the six-member panel ofexperts, which must conclude that the gathered data indicate either 'a causefor concern' or 'no cause for concern'.
Public officials, however, are insisting the experts make an 'it'scoming' or 'it's not' decision.
