Had he read my mind, or just the sameedition of the Sun, which that morning had offered the BlackDeath, Paris streets "ankle deep in dog mess," and acomparatively high suicide rate (in France "suicide relievesthe daily grind") among its 10 reasons to hate the French?
"Froggy bashing" is nothing new here, though it does seemto have gained momentum.
The chalk marl under the Channel may beperfectly pliable; the spirit of gloom and resentment aboutthe tunnel (though the disgruntled always are noisier thanthe positive or the indifferent) may prove more intractable.
Slow tractors are piling up walls ofearth, cranes and pulleys hoist slabs of cast concretethrough a jungle of rusting iron armatures.
Later, I get close to the toy chest, the construction campin the shadow of Shakespeare Cliff, where nearly 1,000 ofthem live. "
But the men staying here -- most ofthem migrant laborers from Ireland and northern England --are rumored to earn as much as $1,750 a week.
We few journalists, looking weedy as hell clutchingour notebooks, trudge along in borrowed boots on a guidedtour past some very large men (inwardly I take back all Ithought, from the safety of the dewy green, poppy-sprayedledge, about "toys").
The site manager gives us the bigfigures.
The total length of each tunnel will be 32 miles, 25of which will be under the sea.
Seven thousand British and4,000 French workers, on eight- to 12-hour shifts, havecompleted more than half of the job.
Of the three tunnels --two big ones for trains and another for service -- thesmallest is the most advanced: They've bored more than 27miles.
The boring machines are fantastic: guided by satellite,gyroscope, computer and laser, these monsters, equipped withCuisinart-style blades more than 16 feet wide, can chop andshred chalk at about 15 feet an hour, or 650-1,000 feet aweek.
The 1986 treaty, which contains a clause prohibitinggovernment subsidies for the tunnel, gave a 55-yearconcession to Eurotunnel, an Anglo-French partnership thatcommissioned Trans Manche Link, a consortium of five Englishcontractors (Costain, Wimpey, Taylor Woodrow, Balfour Beattyand Tarmac) and five French (Boygues, Dumez, Societe Generaled'Entreprise, Societe Auxiliaire d'Entreprises, SpieBatignolles) to design and build the tunnel.
The originalforecast for the whole project was $8.5 billion; to thechagrin of the 206 banks involved, it now has reached $13.3billion and many people estimate tunnel costs of $17.5billion before we see the light at the end.
Therealso is, however, a missing link.
All leaders like to leave their monuments.
For Mr. Mitterrand, with his pyramid and his own triumphal arch, theChunnel is a new shape for the collection.
In the same weekthat the French government revealed its plans to spend 190billion francs ($34 billion) on expanding its high-speed railnetwork, the prime minister announced that there will be nogovernment subsidy for a fast train between London and thetunnel, in effect shelving plans for a much discussed new70-mile link between London and Folkestone.
Many observers believe that, by doing nothing to improvethe nation's creaking rail system, Britain will lose out onthe full benefits of the Chunnel.
"We willbecome the butt of French jokes and be economicallymarginalized in Europe.")
And travelers from France will haveto adjust, perhaps by chewing gum rapidly, when they switchfrom the "grande vitesse" of the Chemins de Fer Francais tothe homely milk route of British Rail, and sit out an extrahalf-hour until arrival at Waterloo.
This, though, is not amatter of time or money, it's "an attitude problem."
