India's chief election commissioner, T.N.
Seshan, early this morning postponedthe remaining two phases of the national parliamentary elections until nextmonth.
At least 14 other people, including a senior police officer, died in theblast.
Officials in New Delhi said the blast was caused by either a timebomb or remote-control device.
He had been receivingbouquets and garlands all evening.
There was no immediate indication who was responsible forthe bomb, but speculation centered on Tamil separatists seeking an independentstate in nearby Sri Lanka.
"When you look at hiscontribution to international order and you think of his decency, it's atragedy," Bush said in Washington.
End of dynastyGandhi's death marksthe likely end of the political dynasty that has dominated Indian politicssince independence in 1947.
His widow, Sonia, sobbed and hugged the couple's daughter Priyanka as thewomen stepped down from the air force Boeing 737 that had flown them to Madrasto bring Gandhi's body home.
After theassassination, violent mobs rampaged along roads leading to Madras on Tuesdaynight, smashing vehicles and other property, according to Indian newsagencies.
intelligence agency of engineering the assassination.
Police fired shots inthe air to drive away the angry, shouting crowd.
There were no injuries.
Paswan, a member of the Janata Dal party, which defeated Gandhi's CongressParty in the 1989 general elections, was not home at the time.
Theloss can never be made up."
J.B. Patnaik, a powerful Congress politician inthe eastern state of Orissa, said: "I don't know what is going to happen now,how democracy will survive.
The Tamil Tigers haveassassinated dozens of political enemies in Sri Lanka and southern India,often using powerful plastic explosives set off by remote control.
Earlierthis year, the state government of Tamil Nadu was dismissed and central ruleimposed after allegations that local politicians were providing aid andprotection to the Tamil Tigers.
Caste membership is a birth-givencondition that remains unchangeable during a lifetime.
Caste is defined byvarna (rank) and jati (group within rank).
Each varna is associated with acolor.
The four varna and their colors, in order of descent:;    Brahmins: Religious leaders and scholars; whiteKshatriyas: Rulers,nobles, warriors; redVaisyas: Banking and business; yellow;   Sudras: Artisans, laborers and servants; blackBeneath thishierarchy are the Panchamas, also know as outcastes or untouchables, whoperform such tasks as tanning and leather working.
Political parties;   Congress Party: Centrist party, led India's independence struggle againstBritish colonial rule.
Is widely perceived as secular and pro-liberalization.
Has about195 Parliament seats.
Janata Dal: Led by former prime minister, V.P.Singh.
Part of center-left alliance challenging caste system and seeking tobuild a more equitable social structure.
Bharatiya JanataParty: Economically and politically conservative pro-Hindu party.
In1989 , it won 85 out of 543 seats.
Supported by militant Hindu groups.
; ...India's politicalbloodlines;    Rajiv Gandhi;    1944-1991Became prime minister in 1984after assassination of Indira Gandhi.
Was pilot for Air-India for nine years.
Assassinated during campaign stop Tuesday.
;    ... Indira Gandhi;   1917-1984Prime minister from 1966-'77 and from 1980 until assassinated bySikh militants.
Daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru.
Worked to establish a democracy, improve livingstandards.
;    ... Mohandas K. Gandhi;    1869-1948Leader ofnationalist movement, pioneered nonviolent resistance against British rule.
Considered father of country.
Assassinated by Hindu fanatic.
; ...Sources: Dictionary of World Religions, World Book Encyclopedia, WorldFactbook 1990, Encyclopedia Brittanica, Current Biography, World Almanac 1991,New York Times, Associated Press; ..... Reported by Maggie Hirsch, graphic byJenny Anderson -- Mercury News  
