The Civil Aviation Authority, meanwhile, ordered increasedinspections on 37 airplanes with CFM56 engines, the type on theMidland Airways jet that crashed Sunday.
Freddie Yetman, technical secretary of the British Airline PilotsAssociation, said this showed that investigators ``must have somesuspicion of these circuits.''
In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration orderedinspections of 300 Boeing 737s for possible cross-wiring of enginewarning systems.
``FatalError'' said the Daily Star.
``Pilot Shut Off the Wrong Engine''said the Sun.
The jet, en route from London to Belfast with 126 people aboard,plunged into an embankment a half-mile short of the runway at EastMidlands Airport in central England as it was trying to make anemergency landing Sunday night.
The trouble was in one _ theyshut down the other.''
But the network said investigators had yet to detemine whetherfaulty instruments contributed to the crash.
The Washington Post, quoting unidentified accident investigators,said the crew believed they were making a routine, one-engineemergency landing, and apparently thought they had solved theproblem when they shut down an engine.
Spokesmen for both the FAA and the National Transportation Boardsaid they knew of no information reaching U.S. officials about theflight recorders' contents.
The airplane's two ``black boxes,'' the cockpit voice recorderand digital flight data recorder, are being examined at thegovernment's laboratory in Farnborough, outside London.
According to court documents and federal officials in America,the FBI is investigating a General Electric Co. admission that testrecords may have been falsified at a factory which made parts forthe CFM56 engine that failed here.
The Seattle factory also made a check and flow valve for the F404engine aboard the Navy's FA-18 fighter, GE spokesman Richard Kennedysaid Wednesday.
Government sources,speaking on condition of anonymity, said Hunt reported at 8:06 p.m.that ``I have an engine on fire.''
Then, at 8:14 p.m., the sourcessaid he told traffic control: ``I am shutting down the starboard(right) engine.''
The plane crashed 12 minutes later at 8:26 p.m.
The engines are made jointly by U.S.-based GE and a Frenchcompany, SNECMA.
But certainly this precautionary measure doesnot imply there has been any cause identified (for the crash.
