Introduction: A crippled United Airlines DC-10 crashed a half-mile short of a runway while trying to make an emergency landing Wednesday afternoon, bursting into a cartwheeling fireball that broke into what one eyewitness described as "15,000 pieces" and killing at least 123 of the 293 passengers and crew members on board.
Remarkably, as many as 166 persons survived the violent crash, according to Richard Vohs, a spokesman for Iowa Gov.
Terry E. Branstad.
The fate of four others was not immediately known.
"We were all walking around in shock.
I was a little dazed."
"It's the goddamndest thing I ever saw in my life," said Charles Mertz of Castle Rock, Colo., another of those who walked away.
Suitcases, paper, mail, clothes, chunks of burning metal and bodies were strewn over the inactive runway at Sioux Gateway Airport, where the plane crashed after desperately circling for a half-hour.
One hundred ambulances, fire trucks and helicopters from as far away as South Dakota plucked out the victims.
The search for bodies was difficult because some of them were scattered in the cornfield.
United Airlines declined to comment on the number of survivors or to release the names of the 282 passengers and 11 crew members.
A team of National Transportation Safety Board investigators left Washington Wednesday night for Sioux City.
The hydraulic system that disintegrated Wednesday works the same way a power steering system operates in a car.
Some aviation experts, speculating on why Flight 232 crashed after completing less than half of its scheduled 930-mile trip to Chicago, suggested that the explosion of the tail engine sent shards of metal through the tail section, somehow destroying common lines that serve the three hydraulic systems.
Radio transmission indicated the plane's maneuverability was limited to right-hand turns.
Preparing for Crash Landing "Then they said we were preparing for a crash landing.
Haynes brought the plane into the airport's 9,000-foot-long southwest runway, surrounded by corn, soybeans and pasture with some trees seven miles outside downtown Sioux City.
At about 4 p.m. CDT, the plane made its final approach.
Onlookers watched hopefully.
It didn't.
Shortly before touchdown the plane's right wing began to dip and the nose began to fall.
The wing hit the ground a half-mile before the runway.
I think it landed upside down," said passenger Melanie Cincala of Toledo, Ohio, who said the plane burst into flames after she got off.
A large piece of the fuselage barreled onto the runway.
Huge clouds of smoke and flames billowed upward as firemen sprayed foam over the wreckage.
Rescue helicopters hovered overhead.
Marshall said he thought he helped a half-dozen out and then he ran.
He had just landed in another plane.
In one group of six seats, a woman sitting in the middle was barely injured, her husband beside her was dead and two behind her were dead," Bendixen said.
Hewitt Graham, manager of Graham Flying Service, a charter service and corporate aircraft maintenance firm that operates out of the building closest to the crash site, said he was in his office, answering phones, when five crash victims -- a man, his wife and young son and two other men -- walked in.
"It was amazing.
Survival Rate Remarkable C. O. Miller, former chief investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board, said the crash's survival rate was remarkable and was probably the result of the pilot's ability to maneuver the plane close to the ground before losing complete control.
"If an airplane cartwheels, it is very fortuitous that anybody got out," said Miller, now a private aviation safety consultant in Sidona, Ariz.
He said a smaller plane, such as a DC-9, would have been far more likely to break up more severely.
About 50 survivors were housed overnight at Briarcliff College.
United, the nation's second largest airline, has one of the oldest fleets in the industry.
The average age of its aircraft is 13.5 years.
Wind speeds were clocked up to 30 m.p.h.
On May 25, 1979, American Airlines Flight 191 lost an engine on takeoff, banked sideways out of control, slammed into a field and exploded.
The NTSB also criticized McDonnell Douglas' design as vulnerable to maintenance damage.
McDonnell Douglas suspended production of the DC-10 airliner in 1983.
In all, 369 DC-10s were produced.
Wednesday's tragedy was the worst in a recent series of accidents and mishaps involving United.
Nine persons were hurled to their deaths last Feb. 24 when a cargo door popped open in flight, tearing a gaping hole in a United Boeing 747 jetliner.
The cause of that accident, which took place over the Pacific near Hawaii, is under investigation.
Turns Up Deficiencies The accident probe has turned up deficiencies in United's procedures regarding the cargo doors.
The airline told NTSB investigators that it had "somehow overlooked" an FAA recommendation to inspect the cargo door latch locks each time the door is closed manually, rather than electrically.
On Tuesday, a United DC-10 with 249 people aboard slid 300 yards on the runway after landing at rain-soaked O'Hare International Airport in Chicago but there were no injuries.
J. Michael Kennedy reported from Sioux City and Bob Baker from Los Angeles.
Also contributing to this story were Larry Green and Tracy Shryer in Chicago, Tamara Jones in Denver and Penelope McMillan and Denise Gellene in Los Angeles.
The "complete hydraulic failure" reported by the United pilot is one of the most feared events in flying.
Page 18 
