Witnesses who visited the site said there were no survivors.
U.S. rescue and recovery teams said that the plane hit a mountain about 4,300 feet above sea level, having missed clearing the peak by about 300 feet.
Ackerman said that the plane appeared to have hit "nose first, right into the rocks; its two wings sheared off, its engines melted, its fuselage gone."
Wreckage Examined Ackerman said that military paratroopers lowered themselves from his helicopter on ropes to examine the wreckage. "
They told us everyone had died instantaneously," Ackerman said.
Also aboard the plane were Hugh Anderson Johnson Jr. and Patrice Yvonne Johnson, both aides to Leland (who were not related); Joyce Francine Williams, an aide to Rep. Ronald V. Dellums (D-Berkeley), and an expert on child nutrition; Y. Ivan Tillen, a New York businessman and friend of Leland's; Robert Woods, a political and economic officer at the American Embassy in Addis Ababa; Gladys Gilbert, a special projects officer for the mission of the U.S. Agency for International Development attached to the embassy; Thomas Worrick, the acting AID representative in Ethiopia, and Worrick's wife, Roberta.
7 Ethiopians Killed Also on board were Debebe Agonofer, an Ethiopian agricultural economist with the AID mission, and six other Ethiopians, including the plane's crew of three.
"Their deaths are a collective loss to all humanity," Dellums said.
By Sunday, 18 aircraft, including four American helicopters, two American C-130 airplanes and 12 Ethiopian aircraft, were involved in the search.
Three more American helicopters were reported to be en route from Eglin Air Force Base in Florida when word of the discovery came.
Clair M. Gilk, commander of one of the two helicopters that were the first to spot the wreckage.
In Washington, a Pentagon spokesman, Navy Capt.
Dellums to Accompany Bodies Dellums, House Majority Whip William H. Gray III (D-Pa.) and Republican Reps. Bill Emerson of Missouri and Jack Fields of Texas plan to fly to Addis Ababa to accompany the bodies back to the United States.
There, the crew came upon a Roman Catholic missionary who told them that he had heard reports from local villagers that a plane had been heard nearby last week.
The surveyor was taken aboard, crew members said, but on their way toward their destination they spotted the crash site.
The location was described as very steep, with the plane resting on land that was pitched at an angle of about 60 degrees. '
Mostly Rocks and Brush' Crew members described the site as "mostly rocks and brush" and indicated that the pilot of Leland's plane may have been trying to escape bad weather on Monday by following the pathway of a river flowing through a valley.
Rep. Alan Wheat (D-Mo.
), who with Ackerman had been flying with search crews for the last two days, said he telephoned House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) from Addis Ababa soon after the discovery was made.
The crash site was described by U.S. authorities as being about 20 nautical miles due east of the town of Gambela and 230 nautical miles west-southwest of Addis Ababa.
It appeared to be near the village of Bure.
However, Sunday was the first day that helicopters flew over the area to make visual inspections.
Wheat, who was among those who had pressed Defense Department officials for the deployment of more aircraft in the search, said after the discovery Sunday: "We could have brought every plane in the world that we have, and it would not have made a difference."
President Bush, in his Sunday statement, said: "I have known, admired and worked with Mickey Leland for many years.
His sense of compassion and desire to help those in need has aided millions of people from Houston to Addis Ababa.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III praised the congressman as "an outstanding statesman and humanitarian who died serving his country."
Leland was a former Houston pharmacist who called the fight against hunger "my passion."
He leaves a wife, Alison Walton Leland, and a 3-year-old son, Jarrett.
Mrs. Leland is pregnant with the couple's second child.
Leland had no significant opposition for his congressional seat since he was first elected, winning his most recent election with 96% of the vote.
Times staff writer Melissa Healy, in Washington, contributed to this story.
