Introduction: A French DC-10 jetliner with 171 people aboard experienced a powerful high-altitude explosion, possibly from a terrorist bomb, before crashing in a remote desert region of Niger in northern Africa, officials in France said Wednesday.
Late last month, the French government sent a naval task force of five warships into Lebanese waters as part of what President Francois Mitterrand called a "rescue mission" for several thousand French nationals living in the war-torn country.
But the action was widely perceived as an attempt to provide protection and support for Maj. Gen. Michel Aoun and his Maronite Christian forces against Syrian troops and Muslim militias in Lebanon.
Ever since, one intelligence official said Wednesday, the French government has realized that its planes were being targeted for some sort of terrorist attack.
French military helicopter crews who visited the crash site in the desolate reaches of the Sahara Desert late Wednesday afternoon found no survivors.
Included among the presumed dead was the wife of the American ambassador to Chad.
Anonymous callers to the airline office in Paris and to a Western news agency in London claimed responsibility for the crash on behalf of the Shiite Muslim terrorist organization Islamic Jihad.
We would like to say the French are warned not to exchange information regarding Sheik Obeid with the Israelis no more.
Long live the Islamic Republic of Iran."
However, the message made little sense in the context of France's limited role in the Obeid matter.
"The pieces are widely scattered, so it didn't crash on impact," a Foreign Ministry spokesman said.
Air controllers lost contact with UTA Flight 772 less than an hour after it took off from N'Djamena.
"If there had been a very serious problem on board, other than an explosion or the sudden disintegration of the airplane," said UTA spokesman Friess, "there would have been at least several seconds or minutes for the crew to re-establish contact. "
UTA officials insisted that the DC-10 was in good working condition, having completed 60,000 hours of flying time on 14,700 flights in 16 years of service.
Twenty-five people on board were injured in that attack, which the Chadian government blamed on Libya.
Chad-Libyan relations have recently normalized after a 10-year guerrilla war.
At the White House, Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said the U.S. government's information on Tuesday's disaster was limited.
It seems to me that there's a much stronger Middle Eastern context than an African context," Hoffman said.
This would send a pretty clear message to France that they ought to back away," Hoffman added.
He noted that by the end of August, "all the main Shiite players in Lebanon had threatened some sort of retribution against France."
Threats by Militants On Aug. 20, the Revolutionary Justice Organization threatened to "strike deep into the heart of French territory."
Three days later, Hezbollah threatened to stage suicide attacks against French targets.
While France's willingness to bargain with terrorists for the freedom of hostages had in the past created a modus vivendi that appeared to spare the country from violent attacks, Hoffman and other analysts suggested that the stakes in Lebanon had become too important for those old rules to apply.
"In these people's eyes, we're really talking about Lebanon's future.
"The last battle for Beirut has yet to be fought."
Another analyst at the center, Robert Kupperman, discounted the possibility that a small terrorist group alone could have been responsible for the airborne bombing. "
According to intelligence specialists, security at the airport in Chad at which the plane stopped is under the control of French officials.
The State Department said six other Americans were aboard.
Mrs. Pugh was on her way to the United States for her daughter's wedding, according to her sister, Sally Johnson, of Brawley, Calif.
Most of the passengers were African.
Tempest reported from Paris and Mann from Washington.
Times staff writer Douglas Jehl, in Washington, contributed to this story.
