Introduction:   Inside a small motor home , JoannePierluissi raised her sleeve as nurse Mary Perez inserted a needleinto the vein above her forearm, drawing blood into a tube for adiabetes test.
Twelve million Americans have some form of diabetes, but it ismost prevalent among minorities, especially Native Americans, blacksand Hispanics.
No one really knows what sparks it, but researchers believeHispanics could hold the key.
San Antonio, the nation's ninthlargest city, with a population that is 50 percent Hispanic, isbecoming the base for diabetes studies.
San Antonio's Hispanic makeup led Dr. Ralph DeFronzo to abandonhis prestigious position as a Yale University diabetes researcherand persuade his four-member team to relocate to the University ofTexas Health Science Center.
An epidemiologist at the center, Dr. Michael Stern, has devoted10 years to studying Hispanic diabetes and led the grassroots studyof Type II diabetes.
Type II, the most common form, develops mostly in obese adultsover 40 who also may have a family history of the disease.
In obesediabetics, the body has too much insulin because it is burning morefats than sugars.
Stern said family studies of diabetic patients are brining himcloser to finding the gene that triggers the disease.
A genetic marker might identify people who are susceptible, whichcould lead to a screening test, he said.
``Then you could go out andzero in on the genetic susceptibles and you can be more intense onyour recommendations to them and you could also study that group.''
``We use the term double jeopardy for Mexican-Americans,'' hesaid.
``But the interesting thing is that upper-incomeMexican-Americans do not have the same risk as low-incomeMexican-Americans.
Researchers believe that poor Hispanics' diets of cheap,processed foods, lack of exercise and infrequent medical attention _either due to poverty or a cultural bias against doctors _ increasestheir risk of acquiring diabetes.
The study is in its follow-up stage, to see if diagnosed diabetespatients have changed their lifestyle and have sought medical care.
Teresa Castro, 54, whose diabetic husband died at age 37, wentthrough the screening eight years ago.
She was told that because ofher weight, 254 pounds, she had hypertension and was at risk ofdiabetes.
``I went to the screening because they called and said it wasfree.
``I feel OK, but they tell me that one year you can be OK and thenext year, it can be totally different.''
That will include work for Lipha Chemicals, which makes ananti-diabetic drug called metaforim that improves the body's abilityto respond to insulin.
The drug is widely used in Europe, Canada and Mexico and shouldbe approved by the Food and Drug Administration in several years forU.S.
Educating elementary-school-age children about healthy dietswould help reduce the number of diabetes cases, DeFronzo said.
