Introduction: A tornado blasted through this NorthFlorida town before dawn today, destroying several homes and acollege library, blowing off rooftops, flipping cars and leavingfour people dead and 15 injured, officials said.
``There was this huge roar and then I heard a tree crack outthere and thought we were all gone,'' said Marie Prince, a MadisonCounty sheriff's dispatcher.
The tornado passed only four blocksfrom her office.
A house-to-house search found no more bodies, but a man and ababy had to be freed from separate homes where they were trapped,Peavy said.
``It didn't leave any of it.
Not even a dish.
You'd never knowthere was a trailer here,'' said Dorothy Butler, sister of one ofthe victims.
Rescue units from adjoining counties were helping out, alongwith state law enforcement and forestry officials.
The tornado was part of a storm system that struck across theSoutheast with high winds, lightning and hail.
Trees, roofs andmobile homes were damaged, and at least six other injuries werereported.
Madison, a town of about 3,500 people, is the county seat ofMadison County, a thinly populated tobacco growing area of pineywoods, rolling hills and swamps on the border with Georgia.
The twister's destructive path started in front of a shoppingcenter and then proceeded straight into North Florida JuniorCollege, where it ``totaled the new library and took the roof offthe auditorium,'' Peavy said.
As far as his office knew, all the damage was from one tornado,Peavy said.
Electric company workers were restoring power throughout thearea.
Three homes and a trailer were destroyed and five homesseriously damaged, he said, and two people were slightly injured.
The winds destroyed up to nine mobile homes west of Bainbridge,Ga., Monday night, injuring three people, one seriously.
Thesheriff's office said the wind left the homes in shreds.
Bainbridgeis 25 miles northwest of Tallahassee.
Madison County has been hit by seven tornadoes since 1959 withonly one injury reported, according to the National Weather Service.
