As nearly half the acreage afire burns within 150 miles,specialists in the logistics center marshal resources from aroundthe nation.
He hangs up, makes another call and arranges for a procurementexpert to fly from Atlanta to LaGrande, Ore. Another staff member fields a caller searching for a fireofficer called ``Joe Blow.''
``Can you believe it?''
she says over her shoulder.
Magnetsresembling aircraft dot a map of the country, giving the locationand type of equipment available.
``Obviously, firefighting on the line is stressful,'' said FireCenter spokesman Arnold Hartigan.
Hundreds of fires burned fitfully in the Idaho backcountry fordays after the last ``lightning bust.''
One storm laid down 2,000strikes an hour with little rain.
Then winds reaching 80 mph andtemperatures pushing triple digits whipped those spots into majorconflagrations.
Three-inch-thick burning branches blew up to two miles ahead ofthe main fires.
Flames swept over thousands of acres in severalhours' time, creating a smoky miasma around Idaho's capital city.
``Fortunately we don't work at this level all year,'' Hartigansaid.
The complex has taken on a military look.
National Guard troopsin camouflage fatigues march toward trucks for transportation tothe fire lines.
Smoke jumpers sit in the shade of a buildingwaiting for their next leap into 100-foot-tall ponderosa pines,laden with chainsaws or water pumps.
We'rethe supply lines for the troops.''
The requests are for airplanes, helicopters, axes and shovels,portable marine pumps, hoses, fresh fruit, disposable sleepingbags, soft drinks and, most important, manpower.
World War II Navy bombers _ PB-4Y2s and Neptunes _ are lined upon the flight deck, spattered with red retardant.
They fill upagain and again with thousands of gallons of ``slurry,'' afertilizer-based substance that stops fires cold.
Then the craftroar aloft toward the smoky mountains to the north.
After five dry summers, backcountry timber has a moisturecontent only slightly higher than kiln-dried lumber, andstrategists have settled in for a long campaign.
Until then, the lights will be on at the FireCenter, and the pace will be frenetic.
``It's like Wall Street, it's like an operating room,'' Jarvissays.
``Everybody knows it's stressful, but they're not snapping ateach other.
The key is cooperation.
