Introduction: You think it would be utter folly to lend money to a ThirdWorld nation?
development organizations are finding that some ofthe world's poorest entrepreneurs repay their debts at ratesapproaching 100%.
This rescues them from the clutchesof loan sharks -- microloans typically charge the prevailinglocal commercial loan rate -- and lets them borrow again inhard times.
Their repayment performance shines when compared with thatof many sovereign nations.
Everybody does it,"says Accion International spokeswoman Gabriela Romanow.
TheGreen Revolution sent farm output surging in many poornations.
Ms. Romanow cites the case of Aaron Aguilar, an unemployedfactory worker in Monterrey, Mexico, who borrowed $100 to buyclay and glazes for making figurines with his wife in theirback yard.
Sometimes borrowers have to struggle against setbacks thatmight seem comical in the prosperous West.
Undaunted, the women switched to chickens and madeenough money selling eggs to branch out into tomatoes andtailoring, ultimately opening two shops, Ms. Leet says.
"We couldn't believe theirfigures.
But everything they said is true.
"Poverty lending has such promise that Multi Credit plansto make it the bank's number one activity, ahead of tradefinancing, consumer loans and merchant loans, the officialadds.
It says it plans to add 64,000 newclients, up from 40,000 last year and 9,000 five years ago.
Its average loan is $303.Accion's Ms. Romanow says the group, which serves LatinAmerica, plans to expand the lending to a total of between$500 million and $1 billion over the next five years.
Thepayback rate is 98%.CARE, New York, perhaps the world's largest privateinternational-development group, says small economic-activitydevelopment -- primarily microlending -- is itsfastest-growing portfolio.
Betsy Campbell, economic-development manager of Westport,Conn.-based Save the Children, says her group underwent ashift in the 1980s "from being primarily a charitableorganization" to being one oriented towards helpingprofit-making activities.
Repayment rates inmost nations exceed 90%, she says.
"These people value accessto credit so highly that default isn't really a problem," shesays.
Some Third World banks, notably in Asia, have been makingmicroloans for years.
However, most such banks were set upwith state support specifically to target the poor.
Not every charity group in the U.S. has joined themicroloan bandwagon.
The Christian Children's Fund ofRichmond, Va., sticks to relief efforts and toperson-to-person sponsorships, in which a U.S. donor makesregular payments to an impoverished Third World child, forexample, while Africare House in Washington, D.C., focuses onhelping cooperatives improve food production and health care.
Nor is the booming field of microlending without itsdetractors -- or its controversies.
David Munro, an officialwith TechnoServe of Norwalk, Conn., says he prefers to work"on a larger scale, and I also don't see {microlending} aspassing on much in the way of skills.
