And the bestviewing spots are virtually in California's back yard: The Big Island ofHawaii and the southern Baja California peninsula.
Unfortunately, you canprobably forget about seeing it, because, unless you get lucky, you can't getthere from here anymore.
With some people having booked trips as long as three years in advance,airline seats, rental cars and hotel reservations range from difficult toimpossible to get, travel agents and others report.
"It's an event, and it rarely, rarelyhappens.
There is a certain element of traveler out there (and) there's anawful lot of those people.
"The eclipse will be seen from Hawaii tocentral Brazil.
Stars will shine.
The length of this"period of totality," as it's known, will depend on where viewers are alongthe path.
The eclipse will last the longest -- six minutes and 58 seconds --at the center of the shadow in the town of Tuxpan, on Mexico's west coast.
Inthe Bay Area, the moon will cover about 55 percent of the sun's surface.
Among fans of the heavens, a solar eclipse inspires awe, fascination andgrandeur.
Firm estimates aren't available, but blotted-out-sun watchers areexpected to number more than 100,000 -- perhaps 50,000 to 70,000 in Hawaii andan equal number in Baja.
"The effect of it -- the view of seeing the sundisappear little by little and then actually having the (blue) sky disappearand having the birds stop singing -- it's miraculous," said Irving Hochman, amember of the San Francisco Amateur Astronomers.
They called places where relatives had stayed inMexico.
No luck.
Then, good fortunestruck.
Bullock was leading a group toHawaii, and some late cancellations came up.
"Weare so excited," Pamela Dei Rossi said.
"Though travelarrangements are now tough to come by, some opportunities remain.
One isto go by the back door.
Sodoes Mazatlan.
Puerto Vallarta, a resort city, is only a short distanceaway.
Mexicanauthorities will have a checkpoint from July 7-15 at Guerrero Negro, abouthalfway down the peninsula.
Travelers who can't produce original documentsshowing they have accommodations will be turned back, Cardenas said.
Even firm reservations may not be all they seem.
That's important because many eclipse-watchers haven't been able tobook a flight directly to the Big Island.
They've had to get flights intosomewhere else, like Honolulu, and do a short hop to where they want to be. "
Special Mylar viewers for safely observing the eclipseare also available for another $2.
