This thinking was nicely summarized by Rep. Anthony Beilenson, who said plainly, "The truth is, for welfare reform to be successful, it's got to be expensive."
The proposed new spending on welfare should be viewed as an investment, say its proponents, led by Rep. Thomas Downey.
They point out that part of the money will go for special education, training and work programs for welfare mothers, to induce them off the rolls and into jobs.
At the same time they say, certain existing benefits -- mainly Aid to Families With Dependent Children (AFDC) -- must be increased to offset real declines since the base year of 1970.
But less than a quarter of the $5.2 billion outlay would go for that purpose.
In short, the Family Welfare Reform Act amounts to an expanded investment in the status quo.
That might produce reprisals from voters who've watched their tax dollars build and maintain the welfare system, with little evident return on their investment.
Instead, after nearly 20 years, the system's defenders and funders repeatedly tell the public that the problem, if anything, has gotten worse.
In fact, while the level of AFDC benefits has decreased in real terms since 1970, the total level of all welfare benefits has not.
Nearly all AFDC families also receive Medicaid coverage, for instance; more than three-quarters receive food stamps, and one-third have children who receive free school meals.
One-quarter receive housing assistance.
During the unprecedented expansion of the welfare state, the most notable and highly publicized phenomenon has been the development of an entrenched class of long-term welfare dependents.
The House bill doesn't do that.
By adding several welfare programs to what already exists (without eliminating any), the House bill adds another layer to an already complex welfare system.
By further increasing rather than gradually reducing the level of benefits available to recipients, it makes welfare more, not less, enticing.
Earlier this year, there were hopeful signs that we would see sweeping, serious welfare-reform legislation emerge from Congress.
Democrats and Republicans alike agreed on the need for change.
This rare opportunity is being squandered.
