About 10,000 people live in Huaycan.
Most residents are poor migrants from the violent highlands wherethe rebel movement was born.
In the countryside, they make ever-bolder attacks on themilitary.
Rebel columns strike along the spine of the Andes from theEcuadorean frontier in the north to Bolivia in the south.
More than 12,000 people have been killed in the civil war, mostof them Andean peasants slain by rebels or security forces, andofficial figures put damage to the shattered economy at $10 billion.
``Most evaluations of Sendero Luminoso's eight-year expansionunder the democratic system ... have become increasingly grim,'' theAndean Report, a respected economic journal, said recently.
``Political violence in Peru is not the result of poverty alonebut of humiliation, oppression, hate between classes, racism,'' Sen. Enrique Bernales, chairman of a committee on violence, said when itreleased a report in September.
The most striking development of the last 18 months has been theShining Path's move into public view in this grimy capital on SouthAmerica's Pacific coast.
Rebels organize support groups in the slums, infiltrate laborunions, organize marches, spread their message of revolution withthe aid of a sympathetic daily newspaper and agitate amonguniversity students.
Analysts and experts on counterinsurgency say Shining Pathappears bent on dominating the radical left of legal politics.
Guzman, a Marxist philosophy professor, founded Sendero Luminosoin 1970 in Ayacucho, an Andean state capital 230 miles southeast ofLima where he had built a following at the University of Huamanga.
Followers call Guzman, 54, ``the fourth sword of Marxism'' afterMarx, Lenin and Mao.
His movement, a splinter group of the Communist Party, gatheredstrength in Indian communities of the southern Andes for 10 yearsbefore launching its guerrilla war.
Wemust prepare for the insurrection that is coming, which means thetaking of the cities.''
The final stage, he said, would be a popular uprising against arepressive military regime.
Shining Path has infiltrated 167 unions and neighborhoodassociations in the Lima slums this year, says a confidentialInterior Ministry report obtained by The Associated Press.
Cardinal Juan Landazuri of the Roman Catholic Church said:``Priests tell me that young people in the shantytowns are goingover to Sendero.
I have been in a shantytown where there is aShining Path group, and the police are doing nothing about it.''
Theindustrial zone contains 850 of the country's most importantfactories.
The Central Highway passes through what looks like a militaryzone.
Most factories are behind high walls topped with barbed wireand towers from which guards with automatic rifles keep watch.
Guerrillas killed three plant managers in 1988 who were involvedin labor disputes.
Union leaders also are uneasy.
``I doubt if you'll find any union leader ... who will declare heis a Senderista, but I'll bet you'll find many who are afraid to sayanything against Sendero,'' an American labor adviser said oncondition of anonymity.
End Adv for Sun Jan 8
