``I think everyone agrees that the risks are low,'' says MartinRaff, a neurobiologist at University College, London.
``But theycertainly are not zero.
I have not changed my eating habits, but Icertainly do wonder.''
Mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE,was diagnosed only in 1986.
The incurable disease eats holes in the brains of its victims; inlate stages a sick animal may act skittish or stagger drunkenly.
Sheep offalis still used in pig and poultry feed.
Earlier this month, the government announced it would payfarmers 100 percent of market value or average market price,whichever is less, for each animal diagnosed with BSE.
As of Feb. 9, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Foodsaid that 9,998 cattle have been destroyed after being diagnosedwith BSE.
Ireland's Department of Agriculture and Food said about 20 caseshave been confirmed there, all of them near the border with theBritish province of Northern Ireland.
Because of the disease, the U.S. Department of Agriculture'sAnimal and Plant Health Inspection Service banned imports ofcattle, embryos and bull semen from Great Britain in July, saidMargaret Webb, a USDA spokeswoman in Washington.
Similar embargoes have been imposed by Australia, Finland,Israel, Sweden, West Germany and New Zealand, according to theagriculture ministry, and the European Community has proposed a banon exports of British cattle older than 6 months.
The government has committed $19 million to finding the cause ofthe disease.
The Southwood report said it was ``most unlikely'' that thedisease was a threat to humans.
But the report added: ``If ourassessments of these likelihoods are incorrect, the implicationswould be extremely serious.''
About two dozen cases were reported inBritain last year.
Another form, known as kuru, had been found cannibals in NewGuinea.
According to a report in the British Medical Journal, theincidence of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is no higher in Britain thanit is in countries free of scrapie.
