Introduction: A stone's throw from the smelly Smithfield meatmarket is an office building complex with no sign or anything toattract the attention of Londoners hurrying by.
Mounted cameras, jumpy guards and heavy doors keep out theuninvited.
The gold-colored interior is hushed and luxuriouslydecorated.
But scratch the surface of this secretive world, and the diamondbusiness loses some sparkle.
``This year is going to be a critical one for De Beers,'' saysDiamond Intelligence Briefs, a trade publication.
De Beers' South African interests face an uncertain future,largely because of a newly energized political will by the blackmajority in that country, an important diamond producer.
TheAfrican National Congress has pledged to nationalize South Africa'smajor sources of wealth if it takes power.
Apparently attempting to limit risk, De Beers recently announcedit would split South African and foreign interests into twopublicly held companies, one based in Switzerland.
The decline was sharpest in the second half of the year, whensales fell 24 percent from the first six months.
``There was a very definite, noticeable slack in demand,'' saidanalyst Peter Miller of Yorkton Securities Inc. in London.
Zaire returned in 1983 after a two-year split.
``We are as strongly in control of the diamond market as we havebeen for many years,'' said Tim Capon, the cartel's director.
The organization buys rough diamonds from De Beers' own mines,which represent 30 percent of world production, and from producersin Tanzania, South Africa, Zaire, Botswana, Namibia, Australia andthe Soviet Union.
It reveals few details about security.
The buyer basically can take itor leave it.
The gems then go to cutters in the world's major diamond-cuttingcenters: Bombay, India; Tel Aviv, Israel; Antwerp, Belgium; and NewYork.
The rest are put to industrial use.
The organization is fighting the lackluster sales trend bytrying to create new demand.
Last year, it spent $160 million onadvertising and promotion, trying, for example, to boost purchasesof men's diamond jewelry.
De Beers's achievement over the decades has been to mass-marketwhat was once an aristocratic luxury without greatly diminishingits value.
Today, diamonds remain ``the gem of gems,'' althoughmillions of people own them.
So far, it has succeeded.
While other commodities markets havesuffered repeated convulsions, rough diamond prices haven't fallensince the organization started announcing price changes in 1964.
During the early 1980s, when high interest rates caused theworst diamond slump since the 1930s, the organization prevented themarket's collapse by doubling its diamond stockpile to nearly $2billion worth.
But producers criticize the organization's secretiveness andwhat they call its arbitrary valuation system.
Some want more ofthe industry's millions of jobs relocated in their own countries.
After reviewing a complaint filed by theBritish mining company Consolidated Gold Fields PLC alleginganti-competitive practices, Britain's Office of Fair Tradingdecided in August against formally investigating whether theorganization abuses its monopoly.
Now 81, Oppenheimer still serves on De Beers' board ofdirectors, of which he previously was chairman.
His 44-year-old sonand heir apparent, Nicholas, is deputy to Chairman Julian OgilvieThompson.
