Introduction: What kind of justice would Clarence Thomas, PresidentBush's nominee to fill the Supreme Court seat vacated byThurgood Marshall, be?
The civilrights movement was at its greatest when it proclaimed thehighest principles on which this country was founded --principles such as the Declaration of Independence which werebetrayed in the case of blacks and other minorities."
-- "America should not fall into the trap of blaming allthe problems faced by blacks or other minorities on others.
We don't getsmarter just because we sit next to white people in class,and we don't progress just because society is ready withhandouts.
{Judge Robert} Bork was right about that,no question.
Judging requires a certain impartiality.
"At the same time, "impartiality is not the same thing asindifference.
This isn't law school speculation.
People's lives are affected.
That's not a responsibilityI take lightly.
"Many of Mr. Thomas's critics have taken his unconcealedadmiration for Ronald Reagan, his former boss, and RobertBork, his predecessor on the D.C.
Circuit, as evidence thatMr.
Thomas shares their philosophy of jurisprudence.
But infact, a careful reading of his articles and speeches revealsa different sort of judicial conservatism.
Part of King's legacy, for Mr. Thomas,is his reflection on the close connection between law andmorality.
President Bush's nominee understands the hostility he islikely to face in Congress.
"When you're up before thoseconfirmation hearings, it's like going through Dante'sInferno.
Abraham Lincoln oncesaid that the American founders declared the right ofequality whose enforcement would follow as soon ascircumstances permitted.
I believe inthe American proposition, the American dream, because I'veseen it in my own life."Mr.
The family shared a single outhouse with several neighbors.
Mygrandfather has been the greatest single influence on mylife," he claims.
In 1987 he told the Atlantic, "When thecivil rights people indict me, the man they are indicting isthat man.
Damn welfare, that relief]" At home the Thomas boys workedsix hours a day in addition to school: raising the chickens,pigs and cows; cleaning the house and the yard; painting,roofing, plumbing and fixing; maintaining the oil trucks andmaking deliveries.
These lessons of hard work, personal dignity andself-sufficiency were reinforced through years of Catholicschool and college.
He finished his undergraduate studies atHoly Cross College in Worcester, Mass.
"That's where Istarted to get political and radical," Mr. Thomas recalls.
"Iread Malcolm X. I became interested in the Black Panthers.
Hewent on to Yale Law School, where he worked summers at NewHaven Legal Assistance, continuing what he calls "mypolitical consciousness raising.
"Nevertheless, "I never gave up my grandfather's ideals,and when my left-wing opinions began to clash with thoseideals, I began to move away from the left."
Eventually hetook a job with Missouri Attorney General (now Senator) JohnDanforth because "he promised to treat me like anyone else.
The next year he was promoted to the top job of the EEOC.Under the Carter administration, the agency had zealouslypromoted numerical goals and timetables. "
Thomas came in, andhe rejected all that," remarks William Robinson, dean of theDistrict of Columbia School of Law.
The full Senateseated him with only two senators opposed.
The reason for thesmooth passage, EEOC vice chairman Ricky Silber man (whosehusband Laurence Silberman sits on the D.C.
Just as in his life, he turns negative valuesinto positive values, an amazing feat.
"Can Clarence Thomas be confirmed to the Supreme Court?Even liberal judges will go on record praising Mr.
Thomas.
While at the EEOC, Mr. Thomas gavespeeches accusing the Republican Party of "blatantindifference" toward black voters, and chastised RonaldReagan in particular for letting Bob Jones University getaway with racial discrimination, and for "foot dragging" onthe Voting Rights Act extension.
Mr. Thomas and his wife Virginia live in Northern Virginiawith Jamal, Mr. Thomas's son from a previous marriage.
"The problemfor my opponents, and for my friends, is that I don't think Ifit any of these molds very well.
Once people figure thisout, maybe they'll leave me alone.
