Introduction:Backed by public antipathy toward the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster, Gov.
As the deadline approached, the three companies -- ARCO Alaska, BP America and Exxon USA -- responded with a six-page list of ideas.
An aide to the governor described the companies' response as "generally OK" but said that Cowper may issue an order putting his plan into effect anyway.
In one proposed draft of an order, continuation of routine operations at the Alyeska Marine Terminal near the town of Valdez is described as creating "a substantial potential risk of additional oil spill" because the consortium has failed to demonstrate it can manage a large spill with minimal environmental effects.
Equipment must be dedicated to oil-spill cleanup only.
-- The names of 12 oil spill-response team members who do nothing but respond to oil spills and who are available for such duty 24 hours a day.
Installation of Booms  -- The installation of containment booms around all oil tankers in the harbor.
-- Permanent restriction of tanker traffic to daylight hours.
-- Demonstration by April 30 of adequate gear and supplies to handle another 10-million-gallon spill.
If it isn't complied with, we don't have any remedy available to us except shut down the terminal.
And we'll do it."
It also would badly pinch the state treasury, which relies on oil taxes and royalties for 85% of its income.
Even if Cowper's shutdown were found to illegally interfere with interstate commerce and be overturned in court, it could last long enough to drive home a point about improving cleanup response plans.
Tom Kilpatrick of the California Maritime Academy, a former captain himself, said autopilots take full control of a ship once they are switched on.
"The helm will not respond if it's in autopilot," he said.
"That should be the first clue to people on the bridge that the autopilot is on."
A Coast Guard official in Anchorage said the third mate in charge of the tanker shortly before it went aground did complain of being unable to get the vessel to respond to the helm.
The nation's worst oil spill penetrated a national park Thursday, with an airborne spotter "seeing an oil sheen up on some of the rocks and seeing staining on the rocks" at Kenai Fjords National Park, park spokesman John Quinley said.
However, favorable winds were still keeping most of the crude offshore, he said.
Justice Thomas Starke said the earlier bail amount was "unconstitutionally excessive."
Douglas Jehl contributed to this story from Washington.
