Exxon also disclosed that the Long Beach-bound tanker actually was involved in two separate accidents that night in pristine Prince William Sound.
Oil-Covered Birds, Otters Biologists already have counted 95 birds and two otters covered with oil but were unable to capture them for cleaning.
Killer whales, sea lions and ducks also have been spotted swimming in the muck.
Cleanup efforts continued slowly, and Alaska Gov.
Many questions about the disaster remained unanswered.
Still unexplained is why Third Mate Gregory Cousins was steering the 987-foot vessel through the tricky, iceberg-dotted waters on Friday.
Joseph Hazelwood was one flight below the bridge in his cabin when the Exxon Valdez hit the first jagged rock pinnacle about a mile outside shipping lanes.
The ship then "slid about two miles" under full power and hit more underwater rocks, Iarossi said.
At no time did the ship lose steering, he added.
"I agree something is missing," Iarossi told reporters and local residents at a press conference.
Puts Off Filing Charges "We're not going to file any charges until we are done with our investigation," said Coast Guard spokesman Todd Nelson.
The Coast Guard served subpoenas Saturday on the captain, helmsman and third mate to ensure that they make themselves available to investigators.
Experts from the International Bird Rescue Center in Berkeley, Calif., set up a rehabilitation center here Sunday in case oiled birds are captured.
But even if animals turn up in distress, rescues may not be feasible.
A monitor from the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service said he felt encouraged about impact on the area's abundant marine life after patrolling the 50-square-mile slick by boat Saturday.
"The weather will help us or kill us," he added.
Winds of up to 35 m.p.h.
were expected by today.
Neither Exxon nor the state and federal agencies involved in the operation could say how much oil had been mopped up or what percentage of the slick is contained.
The Exxon Valdez spewed about 250,000 barrels of North Slope crude into the ice-blue waters.
Up to $20 Million Damages Iarossi estimated damage to the $125-million ship at $10 million to $20 million.
Videotapes filmed by divers revealed 10 sizable holes in the ship's hull, ranging from 8 feet by 15 feet to 20 feet by 6 feet, Iarossi said.
No disciplinary action has been taken against any crew members, Iarossi said.
The Coast Guard doesn't have tons and tons of its own equipment, and it would have to hire the same people Exxon has," Nelson said.
"That would just slow things down. "
