Early Friday the Exxon Valdez was losing 20,000 gallons of oilper hour, but the flow slowed to a trickle later.
An oil slick snaked about five miles from the ship as wind andtide pushed the crude oil into the sound and away from shore.
Gov.
Steve Cowper said the ship was ``impaled on the reef.''
Hesaid the vessel steered from its course to avoid chunks of ice anddid not return to its normal traffic lane.
Lawn likened the ship's situation to ``trying to park a Cadillacin a Volkswagen spot.''
Divers were to check the ship's hull and their findings were tobe used in making plans for the removal of crude oil still aboardthe vessel.
In Washington, Interior Department spokesman Steve Goldsteinsaid efforts had begun to evacuate waterfowl, sea otters and otherwildlife from the danger area.
The Exxon Valdez had loaded 1.2 million barrels of oil at theAlyeska Pipeline Service Co. marine terminal at Valdez and was enroute to Long Beach, Calif., when it crunched onto the reef.
Theship marks the second aniversary of its maiden voyage today.
Alyeska spokesman Tom Brennan said that, at the reduced rate,the marine terminal's capacity would allow nine days of operationbefore the line would have to be shut down.
The soundis considered a playground for kayakers, sport fishermen andtourists.
The fishingindustry is between seasons.
Wells said the black cod fishery is scheduled to begin April 1,but the region's major herring fishery is not expected to get underway until mid-April.
``It's of concern for two reasons: one is the size of the spilland that this is such a sensitive, very productive area,'' saidLisa Speer, senior staff scientist with the Natural ResourcesDefense Council in New York.
But he added:   ``Living in Valdez, we've always worried that sometime somethinglike this could happen.''
The largest tanker spill in history was in the July 19, 1979,collision off Tobago of the supertankers Atlantic Empress andAegean Captain, in which 300,000 tons _ more than 80 milliongallons _ of oil was lost.
