But for this farmer and others, itwas a give-and-take bailout: Take the money with one hand, give itaway with the other.
``The business that sold me fertilizer and spray andchemicals and tires, they got paid.
The 1988 drought relief program poured more than $400 millioninto North Dakota, the nation's most agriculturally dependentstate.
``It's what carried us through in 1988,'' said Cass Countyextension agent Duane Hauck.
But money did reach areas Congress most intended to aid,including North Dakota, where it kept some farmers on their landand may have prevented some business closures.
``Everyone in NorthDakota in some way or another was helped.''
North Dakota, where the drought evoked memories of Dust Bowldays with tumbleweed dancing along the barren horizon, received themost disaster dollars.
More than 49,000 producers shared $410.2million _ about 10.5 percent of the total package.
Almost all wasfor crop loss.
The state, the No.
1 producer of hard-red spring wheat, losttwo-thirds of its 1988 crop; millions of normally golden acreswithered to pathetic rows of shriveled brown stumps.
But droughtaid cut farmers' losses from $1.1 billion to $706 million, a NorthDakota State University study found.
Each farm dollar triples as it travels down Main Street into theeconomy.
Drought payments added $15,000.
The five states together received nearly half theassistance allocated nationwide.
``There was no question it was needed to stave off a major newwave of bankruptcies and financial problems among Corn Beltproducers,'' said Mark Edelman, a university economist.
``Even the drought assistance for most farmers fell well shortof bringing what their income would be with normal yields, but itprovided a safety net,'' he said.
``From '81 through '86, the bottom pretty much fell out ofeverything,'' said Greg Schulz, who farms about five miles fromGrindberg.
Good crops the next two years started to reverse thetrend, but drought stalled the recovery.
In fact, while crops statewide are in better shape than 12months ago, dollar losses will exceed 1988's estimated $530million, Aakre said.
Cass County also had a better 1989 crop but expects higherlosses in crop dollars.
And while virtually all farmers herereceived government aid in 1988, far fewer will be eligible asecond time.
We were able to cover all our bills.
That's all I had really hopedfor.''
If that seems like a lot, Richard, who grows wheat, soybeans andbarley, notes it costs him $150,000 for rent, interest, seed,fertilizer, equipment and other necessities.
``Our investment in farming is tremendouscompared to the average businessman.
At least they have a commodityto sell.
We might not.''
This year it was break-even.
Next year,we're going to have to start coming around to a profit.''
Grindberg, who farms 900 acres of wheat, soybeans and barley,was in the red last year despite $70,000 in aid and insurance.
In '89, they went too farthe other way I think.''
``Disaster aid is political,'' he said.
``Depending on when youhave the disaster depends on whether they sweeten the pot or not.
If it's an election year ... they all get on the bandwagon.''
But Grindberg will persist.
