Introduction:SUMMARY A lengthy statement attributed to the imprisoned Shining Path leadership, published recently in a leading opposition newspaper, provides what appears to be a strategic rationale for the peace proposal made by the insurgents last fall.
Although La Republica, a prominent anti-Fujimori daily, provided little information on the origins of the "important and unusual" document that it published in a special 25 January supplement, it assured its readers that the lengthy ideological tract explaining the Shining Path's "struggle for a peace agreement" was a genuine Shining Path statement.
(See Note 1) (Note 1) La Republica did not assert that the document was actually signed by Guzman.
However, the paper did claim that the document was "approved" by imprisoned Shining Path Central Committee members Elena Iparraguirre Revoredo, Osman Morote Barrionuevo, Marta Huatay Ruiz, Maria Pantoja Sanchez and Rosa Angelica Salas de la Cruz (25 January).
The paper declared that it was "clearly" its "duty" to publish the document "given the mantle of silence that the government has cast" over the peace negotiations (26 January).
La Republica's publication of the Shining Path strategy statement follows by three months the October 1993 release by the Fujimori government of letters from Guzman calling for peace talks with the government (Radio Programs del Peru, 1 October 1993; Radio and TV, 4 October 1993; Global de Television, 10 October 1993; Panamericana Television, 30 October 1993).
The Shining Path leadership's sudden willingness to pursue peace talks with the government, just as the 31 October national referendum vote was approaching, raised questions in the media about whether the letters really represented authoritative Shining Path policy [see box].
(See Note 2) (Note 2) Among other objectives, the narrowly successful referendum was designed to allow the president to serve a second successive term.
Tactical Retreat for Guzman    Implicitly rejecting Fujimori's claim that the Shining Path's call for a negotiated peace represented an admission of political defeat by the insurgents, La Republica concluded that the movement's leadership saw its call for peace as nothing more than a "temporary ceasefire" (25 January).
(See Note 3) According to the daily's 26 January editorial, the Shining Path tract "makes it clear" that in the eyes of Abimael Guzman a "peace agreement" is simply an "armed truce" until after the year 2OOO, at which time the Shining Path "would resume its bloodbath."
La Republica offered a possible explanation for the insurgents' tactical retreat in a 3O January interview with a "military and subversion analyst," who suggested-that a temporary withdrawal may offer Guzman an opportunity to preserve his authority as political leader despite the obvious limitations of beings imprisoned.
Thee analyst concluded, therefore, that the insurgents' peace strategy represents "an ideological reaffirmation of Guzman's leadership" and "recognition that circumstances have changed."
While such doubts are unlikely to seriously affect Fujimori's prospects for reelection next year, they may have further tarnished the image of the Peruvian president, already damaged by his narrow victory in the constitutional referendum last October.
BOX    Media Doubts over Earlier Shining Path Peace Letters    -- Following the first Guzman letter calling for peace talks, announced by Fujimori at thee United Nations last October (Radio Programas del Peru, 1 October 1993), the conservative daily El Comercio reported that one seasoned political observer had warned" that Guzman's "reported" desire "to reach a peace agreement" does not mean there is reason "to claim a victory in the ongoing struggle against terrorism" since, according to the observer, the imprisoned insurgent leader may no longer control the Shining Path (2 October 1993).
have come out during the 3O days prior" to the 31 October vote (14 October 1993).
-- Also in response to the second letter, Caretas on 14 October claimed that Fujimori was "using" Guzman "in the campaign" to win the 31 October referendum, noting that "with Guzman's letters" calling for peace talks, Fujimori's "promise" to wipe out the Shining Path by 1995 "may gain credibility."
GILISON  cka 17/0107z mar 
