TransManche Link, the construction consortium building the``Chunnel'' said the historic linkup occurred at 8:25 p.m. Tuesdaywhen British workers sent a probe 2 inches in diameter through totheir French colleagues.
Eventually a train trip from Paris to London should take threehours.
Despite her countrymen's fears of losing their ancient moatagainst Europe, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher describedthe breakthrough as ``a very exciting moment.''
``This is Europe in practice.''
Initial tests indicated the two halves were 20 inches out ofalignment.
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole.
Tunnelers areexpected to walk through and greet each other with handshakes in afew weeks.
The tunneling machine on the French side will then guide itselfby laser toward the British machine, ensuring perfect alignment.
Thatcher and French President Francois Mitterrand will meetmid-tunnel on Jan. 26.
The linkup came on the maintenance tunnel, the smallest of threetunnels being dug.
About 80 percent of all the drilling is now complete.
Eight workers suffered injures, two seriously, about 90 minutesafter Tuesday's linkup when a tractor rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
The digging is accomplished by gargantuan boring machines thatbring to mind images from Japanese monster movies.
Mechanical legs slap togetherthe concrete tunnel lining in the wake of the advancing drill head.
The one on the British side will diga side passage, and be buried in cement.
The tunnels were joined 13{ miles southeast of Folkestone,England, the British terminus near Dover, and 10 miles northwest ofSangatte, near Calais.
Militant workers on the French side are striking for more payand began a work slowdown Thursday, threatening to stall thelink-up.
Eurotunnel PLC announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreementwith its banks on $3.5 billion in new credit.
Officials estimate the tunnel trains may carry 28 millionpassengers in the first year of operation.
France hopes the project will revitalize depressed northernregions.
But many Britons fear an influx of continental illsranging from terrorists to rabid animals.
Britain warned Napoleon not to try to build the tunnel; diggingwas started subsequently in 1882 and 1974, but both efforts failed.
