Introduction: Flexing its muscles as a cartel, De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. is raising its diamond prices an average 10% next month.
"The diamond price increase was expected," said Jacques Zucker, of Lachowsky Zucker, diamond dealers in Antwerp, Belgium.
By changing the mix of diamonds that it sells to dealers several months ago, De Beers signaled to the market that it intended to raise quotes, he said.
"Few listened to us two years ago when we advised clients to buy diamonds at depressed values," Mr. Zucker said.
"Now they must accept higher prices."
"The price rise provides the necessary psychological lift to the market," said Peter Miller, a mining analyst at Shearson Lehman Securities in London.
Prices of one-carat D-flawless diamonds have risen to about $14,800 a carat from $12,000 at the beginning of the year, dealers said.
A carat equals 200 milligrams.
De Beers decided to raise prices because rough diamonds were already trading at a premium over its own quotes on the open market, said Andrew Lamont, a company spokesman.
Demand is especially buoyant in the Far East.
Only one out of 17 Japanese couples bought engagement rings less than two decades ago; now more than two-thirds buy. "
Stronger currencies and lower interest rates in West Germany and other European countries also boosted diamond sales, he says.
Demand for polished diamonds in the U.S., Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore, Korea, and the Philippines also raised exports of the leading diamond cutting and dealing centers, primarily Antwerp, Tel Aviv, Bombay and New York.
Analysts are predicting sales of $3 billion in 1987.
Yet some dealers worry because world diamond production surged to 89.6 million carats last year from 47 million carats in 1982.
De Beers surprised skeptics and revived trade from the slump in the first half of the decade by withholding stocks and pursuing an intensive marketing campaign.
In more than half a century of its existence, the Central Selling Organization, which includes as members black African state producers, has outlasted other commodity cartels by never cutting diamond prices.
