Pinched between the Storm Creek and Clover-Mist blazes, anestimated 150 seasonal residents and dozens of tourists wereevacuated twice while hundreds of firefighters faced down walls offlame which threatened annihilation.
Eventually, millions ofdollars, thousands of man hours, and an early autumn snowfall savedthe towns.
No structures were lost within the towns' boundaries, but sevenresidences and five outbuildings were destroyed in the area.
One wag even changed the sign leading into town by adding asingle letter, rechristening it ``Cooked City.''
``Business was way down this fall because we didn't have thehunters, but we got a lot of curious weekenders from Cody andBillings who wanted to see how bad it was.''
The Smiths, who own the only photocopy machine for 30 miles inevery direction, found their small gas station and convenience storea mecca during the fires.
The first time I grabbed all the photo albums but forgotour wedding pictures.
The second time the sirens went off and we hadto leave, my parents had just arrived from North Platte, Neb., so weall went to Red Lodge (Mont.
), got nice motel rooms, and crashed.''
Winter now cloaks Cooke City and Silver Gate, and only about 70year-round residents remain to weather the below-zero months.
Theonly grocery store is on its winter schedule, open just Fridaythrough Monday, and many curio shops are shut up tight, but theBearclaw cabins and most of the other motels are open for wintersports enthusiasts.
The state pays Bob Smith, 34, to groom the trails.
His wife keeps track of him by walkie-talkie.
Patti Smith relishes the winter months because she gets caught upon chores, chats with her neighbors and watches videos.
``I've got the whole story right here in this box,'' said theamateur historian.
``Of course, a lot of it is wrong.''
Like nearly everybody else in Cooke City and Silver Gate, Mrs. Smith says she never wants to go through another summer like thelast one.
Nationwide, it was the second worst wildfire season since thegovernment started keeping records.
Although the 5.9 million acresburned in 1988 did not match the 28 million acres destroyed in 1926,the $583.8 million spent to fight 75,000 fires set a record.
``Are there still smoldering embers out there deep in the rootsof the trees?''
``Could the fires survive thewinter and pick up and come at us again?''
Park officials and fire experts have asked themselves the samequestions.
Rod Norum, a fire behavior analyst with the National ParkService, said he would not be surprised if pockets of fire are foundin the greater Yellowstone area come spring.
When the snow melts in May, the Yellowstone country will providean answer to a question troubling lots of people whose lives werechanged by the wildfires of '88.
Tad Bartimus is the AP Mountain States regionalreporter, based in Denver.
