'Our worst predictions are coming true,' he said. '
I find it unbelievablethat the government and their hand-picked advisers can go on telling thepublic there is no danger.
'The advisers, led by the government's chief medical officer Kenneth Calmanand chief veterinary officer Keith Meldrum, put out a detailed statement tojustify their view that last month's death of 65-year-old Duncan Templeman -following that of Peter Warhurst, 61, a year ago - showed 'no features thatgive cause for undue concern'.The official view is that the deaths are an unfortunate coincidence, eventhough it is statistically unlikely that two dairy farmers should contract adisease as rare as CJD.
One argument put forward by the health department is that CJD has such along incubation period - typically 10 to 20 years - that clinical symptomswould not yet have appeared, even if BSE had triggered any cases of CJD.
'Since the illness of the cows (in Templeman's herd) and the patientoccurred within months of each other, the animals and the patient hadpresumably incubated disease in parallel for some years,' the healthdepartment said.
The source of infection was protein-rich cattle feed contaminated withscrapie, a related brain disease of sheep.
The incubation period isalso longer than originally expected.
According to theirinvestigations, maternal transmission from cow to calf - which would prolongthe epidemic - is very rare or non-existent.
Unlike viruses and bacteria, prions contain no genetic material oftheir own.
The prion may arise by a genetic mutation (spontaneous or inherited) in thehost animal.
Once in place in the victim's brain, it catalyses what John Collinge, aprion researcher at St Mary's Hospital Medical School, London, called a slow'chemical chain reaction', converting the normal protein into its ownabnormal form.
But 'transmission is dose dependent,' Collinge says.
Most independent experts maintain that no human being - dairy farmer or beefeater - is likely to be exposed to BSE in sufficient quantities to developbrain disease.
