Introduction: Fire long ago destroyed the house where Clarence Thomas spent his boyhood.
Butnearby, down a woodsy, one-lane, white-sand road outside Savannah, Ga., sits areminder of what might have been -- the tired cottage where his sister stilllives, by a broad, shining marsh called Moon River.
From theseroots, he might have become one of any number of bright, activist black men torise out of Southern poverty and press a politically aggressive liberal agendaof civil rights and affirmative action -- as did men like Thurgood Marshall,the retiring justice whose Supreme Court seat Thomas might take.
Instead,Thomas, now 43, became something else -- a hybrid product of harsh Southernhistory and baby-boom ambition, a proponent of personal strength overdependence, of individualism over government activism.
Historically, trying to predict SupremeCourt nominees has been extremely risky.
Still, many liberals are convincedthat Thomas' past clearly shows his future.
He wouldalso weaken the wall separating government and religion and further restrictthe rights of criminal suspects and defendants.
Not surprisingly, Thomas'many friends and supporters draw different conclusions.
The Georgia beginningBut any attempt tounderstand the potential successor to the revered Thurgood Marshall must beginin Georgia.
There, just the other day, Leola Williams, Thomas' mother,talked about how the force of family worked on her son:"Clarence wassurrounded by all our older parents.
"I guess Clarence wanted to prove to himselfhe could be what he wanted to be -- and prove to his grandfather he could bethe kind of person (his grandfather) wanted him to be.
"The grandfather,the late Myers Anderson, began training Thomas in earnest when the boy was 9and Leola Williams' life suddenly began coming apart.
Her house off Pin PointAvenue had gone up in smoke, and some months later, her husband went north toPhiladelphia, leaving her with two young children and a third on the way.
Then he'd say, 'Old Man Can't is dead.
"WhenAnderson wasn't coaching Thomas, in his farm fields or on his delivery truck,he made sure the lessons continued, in the hands of the Franciscan nuns ofall-black St. Benedict the Moor School.
Thomas, who had experienced racialmistreatment by white seminarians in Georgia, ultimately rejected seminarylife.
He has identified an episode at Immaculate Conception Seminary inConception, Mo., in 1968 as the final humiliation.
"Thomas left the seminaryand went north to enroll at Holy Cross College in the gritty New Englandfactory city of Worcester, Mass.
Within days of King's assassination, theschool created a scholarship fund named after the civil-rights leader andstepped up the recruiting of blacks.
Thomas, who paid for his college education with loans, jobs andthe newly raised scholarship funds, soon was drawn into the turbulence ofVietnam War and "black power" politics.
He helped found a Black StudentUnion, writing and typing its constitution.
Stung, school officialsgranted a blanket amnesty and the students returned.
Thomas went on to runtrack and write for the campus newspaper.
"I usedto discuss conservative ideas with Clarence and he was interested in them,"Singleton said.
"They were about the dangers of big government trying to solveall the ills of society and how every time you do that you take away from theliberties of the people.
"But it was Thomas Sowell, the conservative blackeconomist now at Stanford University's Hoover Institution, whose work came togrip Thomas' mind.
"But after lawschool, Thomas rediscovered one of Sowell's books.
In that book, Sowell, arguing from a laissez-faire perspective,endorsed the notion that blacks would benefit more from pursuing economicachievement than political agitation.
From Yale to WashingtonThomas,always a top student, was recruited out of Yale in 1974 by John Danforth,R-Mo., then Missouri attorney general, a Yale trustee and a frequent campusvisitor.
, then in 1979 joined Danforth in Washington as a legislative aide.
Reagan administration officials were so impressed by Thomas and his newconservative leanings that they appointed him assistant secretary for civilrights in the Department of Education.
In 1982, they promoted him to the morevisible post of chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Therecontroversy dogged him for the next eight years.
Congress learned in 1989that the EEOC under Thomas' direction had permitted more than 13,000 agediscrimination claims to lapse.
Civil-rights groups accused Thomas offailing to enforce other anti-discrimination laws as well, and of retaliatingagainst employees who disagreed with his policies.
Thomas concentrated onwinning relief for victims of actual discrimination.
He steered away fromlawsuits based on statistical evidence and remedies that included timetablesfor future hiring.
Holding the cupaloft, the official asked for more coffee.
I'm ClarenceThomas.
"SUNDAY IN PERSPECTIVE: A reporter who saw Clarence Thomas at hismost candid writes about the nominee's opinions, fears and frustrations.
.Onquotas:"Federal enforcement agencies .
.On affirmative action: Hereferred to it as "social engineering .
We're standing the principle ofnon-discrimination on its head.
.How justice is chosen; President:The president nominates Supreme Court justices.
Senate: Senate holds hearingsinto qualifications of a nominee prior to confirming, rejecting or failing toact upon the nomination.
Traditionally, justices have had some legaltraining and most have been judges, lawyers or law teachers.
.PastNominees; David Souter: Confirmed by Senate, 1990, despite concerns of someDemocrats about his views on the right to privacy; Anthony M. Kennedy: Confirmed unanimously, 1988; Robert H. Bork: Rejected, 1987, because of hisstrict interpretation of the Constitution, which critics said would have setback progress on individual rights; Douglas H. Ginsburg: Ginsburg asked thathis nomination be withdrawn, 1987, after he admitted having smoked marijuanaas recently as 1979; .
.Sources: Chicago Tribune, World Book Encyclopedia,Compton's Encyclopedia, Who's Who Among Black Americans, news reports;Knight-Ridder News Service  
