The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is floundering, and the international tin cartel has collapsed.
Sales still soared 40% to a near-record $2.56 billion, double the $1.26 billion posted in the 1982 doldrums.
"Selling diamonds is the business of dealers and jewelers; helping them to sell more is ours," says Stephen Lussier, a De Beers marketing executive.
De Beers helped with an advertising and promotion budget that swelled to $110 million this year, up from $43 million in 1980.
Figures for 1986 aren't yet available, but De Beers says it was another record.
Today the U.S. is the world's No.
About three-fourths of American women own diamond engagement rings that cost an average $1,300.
De Beers applied similar promotional techniques world-wide.
One out of 17 Japanese couples bought engagement rings two decades ago.
Now two-thirds do, and Japan is the second-largest diamond jewelry market, followed by West Germany.
De Beers offers its cache to select dealers 10 times a year at sales known as "sights."
The dealer must accept or reject the entire box, valued at between $1 million and $25 million.
If the dealer refuses to buy, De Beers may never invite him back.
The cartel hasn't cut prices since it was founded more than half a century ago.
OPEC members "tend to do what they like," says Jo Flies, chief economist of the Antwerp Diamond Council.
But De Beers is unique, he says, in influencing production and consumption of diamonds.
A carat equals 1/142 of an ounce.
The Soviet Union, which produces an estimated 12 million carats of top-grade diamonds annually, is another unknown.
Other African nations in the cartel want more control over distribution, dealers say.
While sales independence from De Beers "could be disastrous" for the market, Mr. Lunzer says, that won't deter those producers who want "more information and knowledge about final sales of their material."
But the fate of De Beers, South Africa's most famous company, will depend largely on developments in that troubled country, dealers say.
International sanctions, including a possible U.S. import ban on South African diamonds, pose a growing threat.
Recent history indicates, however, that it would be hasty to write off the cartel.
In 1981, Zaire, which mines 22% of world diamond output, left the cartel.
Australia was about to open a huge diamond mine and a speculative boom had led to widespread dealer bankruptcies.
Meanwhile, diamond demand by consumers increased, fueled by De Beers's promotion campaign and favorable economic trends.
Dealers say trade is buoyant again because of lower interest rates and a weak dollar that makes dollar-priced diamonds cheaper in Japan and Europe.
"You can't mix diamonds with oil."
