Introduction: The Jwaneng mine, on the fringes of the Kalahari desert in Botswana, isknown as 'a gem in the world of gems' because it almost certainly is therichest diamond mine in the world - at least in terms of the value of thestones it yields.
Jwaneng's position is being reinforced by a USDollars 160mexpansion programme at present being completed three months ahead ofschedule and under budget.
It, and the country's two other (smaller) diamond mines, between themaccount for 50 per cent of the government's revenue and 40 per cent of thecountry's gross domestic product.
Now a so-called fourth stream isbeing completed which is adding one-third to processing capacity.
Jwaneng's open pit has reached a depth of 190 metres.
Mr Loz Shaw, chief geologist, says drilling down to 600metres shows there are still plenty of diamonds at that depth and so the pitwill go down at least that far.
Mr Derrick Moore, the general manager, says this indicates mining in theopen pit will last another 35 years - 'and then we might go underground'.If experience at De Beers' wholly-owned Finsch mine in South Africa isanything to go by, planning the underground development at Jwaneng mightalready have started.
Yet the bottom of the Finsch open pit - 423 metres -was not reached until 1990.Unfortunately, things did not go completely as expected when undergroundmining started, to some extent because the development was designed by amanagement whose expertise was mainly in open pit mining.
However, Mr Mark Button, mining superintendent, says: 'Finsch has come ofage as an underground mine after two years.
Our costs compare with the bestin the group.
'Among the innovations that have helped Finsch achieve its objectives aresome remote-controlled LHD (load-haul-dump) trucks which are similar toradio-controlled toy vehicles or boats.
About 500 of its 1,900 employees were laid off in August 1992.
It is miningonly five days a week at present and processing on four days.
Last yearFinsch mined 2.68m tonnes and recovered 2m carats of diamonds compared with4.7m tonnes mined and 3.446m carats in 1992.Mr Webb suggests 1994 output will be similar to last year's.
But when marketconditions improve, production can be brought back up to previous levels inabout six months.
