Introduction: For months, this county's politically astute Sheriff Sherman Block maintaineda low profile for himself and his department while city police were beinghammered after the videotaped beating of black motorist Rodney King.
Threedeputies were charged with stealing credit cards from elderly people.
Andallegations that the department is home to white supremacist gangs resurfaced.
"If something can be worked out here,it would be really, I think, a model that can be exported.
"There's got to be a revolution in American policing,"McNamara said.
"They don'treally care much about police reform.
They just want to make sure theircommunities are safe.
The King beating led to an investigation of the policedepartment by an independent commission that found racism, brutality,inadequate discipline, mismanagement and a "siege mentality" pitting officersagainst the community.
The Christopher Commission's scathing report mademore than 100 recommendations, many of them aimed at moving away from thedepartment's "hard-nosed" approach and improving relations with residents.
At the street level, it suggested officers spend more time out of their patrolcars, work more with community groups and ease up on the common practice ofmaking suspects lie face down on the ground even when they pose no apparentthreat.
Now,critics are calling for the same kind of independent investigation of thesheriff's department.
Critics say its leaders havebeen supporters of the local law establishment.
But because Block iselected, his is the last word.
Like Gates before him, Block maintains hisdepartment is a good one with "a reputation as being one of the mostprogressive, one of the most professional, one of the finest law enforcementagencies.
'A last-resortmechanism'"Law enforcement, and I'm going beyond the sheriff's department,did not create the social conditions out there from which the violence isspringing," he said.
(But) We're a last-resortmechanism when other kinder and gentler processes fail in our society.
Andfail they have.
The rhetoric of the LosAngeles police establishment through the years seems to have escalatedconflict, not lowered it.
"The FBI, Amnesty International and the countygrand jury are investigating allegations about both departments.
Besides a new police chief, theACLU's Hicks predicted only "some window dressing and some moderate changesmade to training.
The government doesn't have anything to offer except policerepression, so that's what we get."
