Domestically, the move reflects the competitive advantage that regional banks with large loan-loss reserves have over their big brothers in such money centers as New York, Chicago and San Francisco.
Internationally, it appears that it will be even more difficult for economically troubled developing nations to attract new bank loans.
U.S. banks are increasingly splitting into two groups.
On one hand, there is a small group of money-center banks with comparatively thin reserves against large loans to developing countries.
"It's a parting of the ways between the money centers who are out to collect on their assets and the regionals who want to get out," says Lawrence Cohn, an analyst at Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The Bank of Boston decision "may well drive a wedge between the money-center banks and the regional banks," adds James J. McDermott, Jr., director of research at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc., a securities firm which specializes in bank stocks.
"It's created an enormous quandary for many money-center banks," Mr. McDermott says.
That could add to the lending burden for the biggest U.S. banks.
Yesterday, Manufacturers Hanover announced a regular quarterly dividend of 82 cents a share, offering investors a yield of more than 13% annually.
Mellon Bank Corp. said yesterday that it expects a fourth-quarter loss of about $220 million, and that it would increase loan-loss reserves by about $180 million to cover troubled foreign loans.
Chase Manhattan skidded $2.25 to close at $20.125, Manufacturers Hanover fell $2.375 to $24.25, and J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. was off $1.50 to $30.
Analysts expect that other regional banks may copy the action taken by Bank of Boston.
"I wouldn't be surprised if some of the medium-sized regionals decided to follow," said Cheryl Swaim, an analyst and vice president at Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
In Boston, there were rumors Bank of New England might announce a similar move, but a company spokesman said "reserve levels are appropriate."
When a loan is placed on non-accrual, a bank only credits interest it actually receives, and doesn't automatically accrue interest due.
Bank of Boston also placed on non-accrual $470 million in loans to less-developed countries that are unrelated to trade.
Along with $330 million in such loans previously put on non-accrual, Bank of Boston has now either charged off, or put on non-accrual, all of its $1 billion loans to heavily indebted developing countries.
This doesn't include $170 million in trade-related debt.
While Bank of Boston's action is the most striking to date to remove Latin exposure from its balance sheet, smaller similar actions began at other banks around mid-year.
First Chicago Corp., the 11th largest banking concern, charged off $48.9 million in Third World loans during the quarter.
Continental wouldn't comment yesterday on Bank of Boston's action.
