Introduction:   One of nature's most vicious spectacles, thetornado, is poised to renew its annual assault on America, aschangeable spring weather breeds the storms that spawn twisters.
In 1988 the nation recorded 32 tornado deaths, down from the 59killed a year earlier and well below the long-term average of 99fatalities annually, the National Weather Service reported on Sunday.
But while that's good news, it isn't an indication that thedanger has lessened.
``There is no way of knowing what this tornado season will bring,but the way to survive is through preparedness,'' said Ed Ferguson,deputy director of the National Severe Storms Forecast Center inKansas City.
Unusually warm and wet weather last November helped trigger arecord number of tornadoes for that month, at 121 across thecountry.
That outbreak didn'tcause any deaths, although 10 injuries were reported.
Arkansas and Tennessee recorded the most fatalities last yearwith six deaths apiece, followed by Florida with five.
Four peoplewere killed in North Carolina and two each in Mississippi andNebraska.
States with a single fatality apiece were Kentucky,Michigan, Missouri, New York, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas.
The transition from winter to spring, spurring unsettled weatherand frequent thunderstorms, helps create tornadoes, violentlytwisting winds that reach down from thunderclouds.
Other months averaging more than atwister-a-day somewhere in the nation are July, 82; August, 57;March, 50 and September, 38.
Tornadoes are least likely during the early morning justbefore sunrise.
The typical tornado is only about 50 yards wide and travels abouttwo miles on the ground _ 87 percent of the time heading toward thenortheast, NCAR researchers report.
When twisters are in an area, common sense and knowing a fewsimple rules can save lives, the National Weather Service says.
The weather service even hasits own radio network which can provide continual updates.
If atwister is reported, safety rules include:   _ At home, seek shelter immediately in a basement or interiorhallway.
Stay away from windows and outside walls.
_ At work or in public buildings, head for interior hallways onthe lowest floor, or designated shelter areas.
_ In an automobile, leave immediately.
Do not try to outrun atornado.
