Introduction: The label "black conservative," now firmly affixed to Clarence Thomas' name,does not begin to tell the story of his life, an American story oftransformation.
Thomas and his brother made it in the white world.
Their sister, reared byan aunt, had four children and went on welfare.
He choked up twice on nationaltelevision Monday when he mentioned them.
They shaped his views on individualism, race and society,views that guide him today.
"We wereraised to survive in spite of the dark, oppressive cloud of governmentallysanctioned bigotry.
Self-sufficiency, security"Self-sufficiency andspiritual and emotional security were our tools to carve out and securefreedom," he added.
"Those who attempt to capture the daily counseling,oversight, common sense and vision of my grandparents in a governmentalprogram are engaging in sheer folly.
Before Thomas' second birthday, his father moved to the North and left thefamily behind.
His mother remarried, and her second husband did not want thechildren of her first marriage.
His grandfather, MyersAnderson, had little formal schooling.
But life had taught him a lot.
"Hecould barely read and write -- read enough to read the Bible," Thomas said ina 1983 interview with the Washington Post. "
"He elaborated in the Heritage Foundation paper: "Of course, I thought mygrandparents were too rigid and their expectations were too high.
I alsothought they were mean at times.
The most compassionate thing they didfor us was teach us how to fend for ourselves in a hostile environment.
"As a young man, he wanted to become a priest.
But his trueinterest was in the law.
By then, Danforth was a Republicansenator.
In 1982, after a year as assistant education secretary forcivil rights, Thomas was named by President Reagan to lead the EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission.
Critics said theagency went soft under Thomas.
Abandoning support for hiring goals andtimetables, Thomas focused on resolving thousands of individual discriminationcomplaints.
Hetook his seat on the appeals court in March 1990.Thomas, who lives insuburban Virginia, is married and has a son.
