Introduction: A CEO sneezes in his corporate suite.
What's the link?
Along with oxygen, they may begetting flu and other infectious bugs from their co-workers.
"Modern office buildings are tight,"says Jon Rosenberg, public health officer in California's occupational healthprogram. "
Nor is it to blame forlast month's outbreak in Richmond of Legionnaire's disease -- an illnesscaused by a bug linked to wet, damp spaces rather than poor ventilation.
But as in "sick building syndrome," it's the airtight environment that setsthe stage for problems.
you don't necessarily have to have a sickbuilding," Rosenberg says.
But, alas, many modern ventilation systemsrecirculate indoor air with little or no fresh air.
So the infectious bugsthat a worker exhales at one end of the building can end up, via theventilation system, being inhaled at the other end.
"By recirculating the air,you spread it throughout the building," says Nardell.
"People who had nodirect contact with this case, might have been exposed in far reaches of thebuilding.
Respiratory infection experts say that flu virusesand measles are easier to spread than TB.
"Building workers hadcomplained for years about poor air quality.
The building's ventilationsystem permitted circulation of some outdoor air -- 15 cubic feet per minute-- a low level commonly found in buildings since the 1930s.
Even lower levelsof outdoor air ventilation, below 10 cfm, have become common since 1973, thepost-oil embargo era.
Other studies have documented:;   (check) Flu spreadsquickly on airplanes where ventilation systems consist entirely ofrecirculated air.
(check) Tuberculosis can spread in homelessshelters, prisons and hospitals where ventilation is poor.
In his tuberculosis study, hefound that the biggest benefit comes from improving the worst ventilationsystems that allow very little fresh air.
If the ventilation is moderatelyeffective but not ideal, further improvements yield only a slight decrease ininfectious illness.
"There's going to be a price of living together in a communal society.
