Introduction:IN BLOOD-RED letters, the sign on the front window of the Dealers Outlet gun store in suburban Phoenix declared: "Urgent!
Act Now!
Stop the Gun Ban!"
"We are petitioning to protest the semiautomatic gun-control bills before Congress," read the text above a fast-growing list of names.
"I'm a one-issue voter, and I'm going to do everything in my power to take DeConcini out," George Hiers, a burly man on crutches, vowed as he bought a semiautomatic shotgun for his wife to defend herself with while he's away on hunting trips.
in a display of fury that represented far more than retaliation against a former supporter.
Law-enforcement leaders, concerned about rising violence and terrorism, have ended their friendliness toward the gun lobby and become well-organized in opposition.
Meanwhile, California, whose voters only seven years ago defeated an initiative that would have frozen the number of handguns in the state, last May became the first state to ban assault weapons.
At the same time, gun-control organizations are beginning to match the NRA's mass mailings, ads and lobbying; many schools are showing "Guns and the Constitution," an anti-gun video produced by Handgun Control Inc., whose chairwoman is Sarah Brady, wife of former White House Press Secretary James Brady, who was disabled by gunfire in the 1981 assassination attempt on then-President Reagan.
And the NRA even is feeling pressure from more-militant gun groups that threaten to drain away members and funds.
"We're going to go down the road of either prohibitive firearms regulations or tough criminal justice provisions" -- that is, more prosecutors, penalties and prisons, the course sought by the NRA.
"Once you get into a (gun-control) rut, it's tough to get out of that rut."
That would seem ironic, since guns permeate the cultures of those generally conservative states.
But with opinion polls in both states showing that large majorities of residents support bans -- and with police complaining about being outgunned by criminals -- legislators have moved into action, spurring angry counterattacks from the NRA.
Call Now!
Write Today!
AS PAT JONAS signed the petition in the gun store near Phoenix, one could witness the NRA's true political power: mobilizing citizens at the grass roots.
Probably no other organization in the world floods government officials with as many phone calls, letters, telegrams and visits from its members as the NRA.
(Automatic guns fire 20 bullets or so per trigger pull; semiautomatics fire one bullet per trigger squeeze, but a fast index finger can get off as many as 20 shots in five seconds as ammunition is automatically reloaded from a clip.
And many semiautomatics can easily be converted to automatic weapons.)
In his letter, Baker called DeConcini's proposal a "tragic mistake," charging that it could even block sales of traditional hunting rifles and lead to criminal charges against 30 million sportsmen who own semiautomatic guns. "
Does anyone seriously believe (Senate Bill) 747 will stop drug smugglers .
who bring cocaine by the planeload .
Baker's letter asked.
"Lies and Exaggerations" GUN OWNERS' rage spread quickly after the NRA letter hit Arizona the last week of April.
Aden believes that semiautomatic guns would come in handy if a Mexican revolution spilled over the border and Arizonans got caught in the cross fire.
He said he had sold three years' stock of assault rifles in the two weeks after Bush issued a temporary import ban in March.
"We stood behind DeConcini at the last election, and we feel he has completely betrayed us."
Another member of the club, Bill Houston, telephoned DeConcini aide Matthew McCoy in his Washington office to protest.
McCoy's end of the conversation went this way: "You're misinterpreting the legislation.
You think that by attempting to burn your friends you can .
If the alternative were something more strict than DeConcini's legislation, how would you feel then?
Metzenbaum is going to come from somewhere out of left field."
Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum (D-Ohio) is pushing a ban that is much broader than DeConcini's.
The recently re-elected senator said he was trying to head off more-drastic legislation from Metzenbaum and others, including California Democratic Reps. Howard L. Berman of Panorama City and Fortney H. (Pete) Stark of Oakland.
If any S.O.B.
(Goldwater made the remark shortly after appearing in a full-page, "I'm the NRA" ad in Time magazine.)
Gen. Edwin) Meese on banning plastic guns.
If I weren't a mature person, I'd say, 'Up yours.
Foxes in the Henhouse AS THE NRA waged its war in the West, Marion P. Hammer, a 50-year-old grandmother with brown bangs, strode to the front of another heated battleground in Tallahassee, Fla., a packed meeting room in the state's House of Representatives.
Only 4 feet, 11 inches tall, she could barely be seen as she took the podium.
Her gray slacks, blue ruffled blouse and blue suede jacket complemented her steel-blue eyes but belied her credentials: prize-winning marksman and hardball lobbyist for the Florida NRA.
Attacking the crux of the bill, Hammer told the subcommittee: "You cannot differentiate between semiautomatic firearms that look menacing and your routine sporting firearms because, functionally, they are the same."
Next, she dealt acidly with one of the NRA's prickliest political problems: "There are some law-enforcement officers who are NRA members who are against us.
That is, the ban would cover not just the targeted guns -- the ones with folding stocks that make them easy to conceal, pistol grips, huge ammunition clips and flash suppressors that, according to police, make it easy to spray bullets from the hip.
But doomed as well, she claimed, would be firearms of traditional design long used by hunters and target shooters in one of the nation's gun-owningest states.
The Legislature later closed that seeming loophole in the wake of widespread hoots about the "Gunshine State."
Rising at 4 a.m. after less than four hours' sleep, chain-smoking filter-tip cigarettes, sipping diet sodas -- and aided only by one part-time staffer and a $125,000 yearly budget -- she tirelessly works Capitol corridors and grinds out newsletters aimed at firing up the NRA's 130,000 Florida members to contact their representatives.
Once, she threw a party at a firing range for legislators, aides, spouses and children; hundreds feasted on shrimp and oysters, and many took shooting lessons from expert instructors.
Despite her past successes, however, the House panel voted 5-1 to pass the assault-weapons bill along to the full Criminal Justice Committee.
Hammer still would have several opportunities to halt the bill's progress.
"The NRA has been unreasonable with their positions for so long, it's catching up with them now," asserted Rep. Ronald A.
Silver, a Miami Beach Democrat who chairs the criminal justice panel.
Dramatic evidence of this cropped up the day before the House action, when Sen. John A.
Grant Jr., a conservative Tampa Republican who heads a companion Senate committee, was being interviewed about prospects for an assault-weapons ban.
"I wasn't calling members of that committee Gestapo," she maintained.
State Sen. George G. Kirkpatrick Jr. (D-Gainesville) protested in an interview that he had been savagely attacked by Hammer's group in his latest campaign despite a "strong pro-gun" voting record.
Kirkpatrick, who easily won re-election, predicted that such tactics will backfire. "
Said Hammer: "He's very bitter, but I have a job to do.
We have a right to vigorously oppose anyone whose actions are detrimental to our best interests."
Hammer faces another growing problem: competition from lobbyists on the other side.
The effect on subcommittee member Carol Hanson (R-Boca Raton) was decisive.
Because of the booklet, she said, she was no longer willing to support merely a limit on the capacity of ammunition clips -- a fallback position to which Hammer had reluctantly acceded.
Eventually, Hammer was able to minimize her losses.
And, instead of enacting a seven-day waiting period for gun buyers, as sought by Handgun Control, it required dealers to make a less-comprehensive background check by telephoning a police computer.
Although a Handgun Control news release declared, "Florida Deals NRA Fourth Loss of Year," Hammer was able to say with some justification, "I think we did pretty good."
The tide turned her way, she claimed, after legislators saw how student demonstrators in China were overwhelmed by troops "because they were unarmed."
The NRA had helped kill the measure weeks earlier.
But after a spate of gun accidents killed three children and wounded three others in early June, Hammer gave conditional support to the bill, and it passed overwhelmingly.
Rambo Sells
last spring, a riot of orange- and gold-striped tulips swayed outside the gunmetal gray NRA headquarters in Washington.
Inside the eight-story building, many of the 365 employees worked on gun-safety courses, shooting competitions, police firearms training and other services that predominated at the NRA until heavy lobbying against gun control began in the 1970s.
The shift came after the murders of two Kennedys and a King inspired passage of major federal gun regulations in 1968.
In his seventh-floor office, Jim Baker -- one of five in-house lobbyists supplemented by four high-powered outsiders -- had put the finishing touches on his letter to Arizona gun owners, slamming DeConcini's bill.
You don't need to hunt.
But I don't think you should have to justify anything in terms of need.
That's a socialist concept.
You ought to be able to own within reasonable limits what you want.
The question is whether these proposals will fight crime effectively, and we think highly restrictive gun controls are a bankrupt concept."
A bit more candidly, J. Warren Cassidy, the NRA's executive vice president, later acknowledged that the Goldwater comment had hurt badly.
He wrote back, asking, "What do you want me to do?
I can't recall him, he's out of office -- he's an American legend."
But Cassidy noted in the interview: "When a guy like Barry or Dennis DeConcini does these things, it's a belt to the solar plexus, because you've counted on these fellows."
He said that while touring exhibition booths at the NRA's recent national convention, he came across "a basic .22 rifle that had a big banana clip and a big round thing to hold it with.
Korologos asked the exhibitor, "Why are you ruining this perfectly legitimate rifle?"
"Ah," came the response, "but they sell."
"We may be branded as traitors, but that's the nature of the game in this town, to forge agreements and compromises," said the source, who requested anonymity.
Actually, in the face of increasingly well-organized support for gun control, the NRA grudgingly compromised on cop-killer bullets in 1986 and plastic guns in 1988.
The organization's revenues last year included $45.4 million from membership dues and $9.4 million from contributions.
In addition, the NRA is continuing to contribute heavily to political campaigns, despite the disappointments it suffered in last year's elections.
But Dover, N.H., Chief Charles Reynolds, president of the International Assn.
of Chiefs of Police, said that he and NRA President Joe Foss recently agreed to "keep the debate issue-oriented, without personal attacks."
had found that the library group and the NRA "supplied the most accurate information" of all lobbying organizations.
A Prayer for Arms AT THE NRA's national convention in April, more than 16,000 people roamed across 160,000 square feet of exhibits at St. Louis' convention center.
They shouldered pea-green SIG assault rifles.
They clicked the triggers of super-light Glock 17 pistols.
They marveled at new laser targeting devices that can project a red beam hundreds of feet, from gun to bull's-eye.
And then, during a break, 1,000 NRA activists filed into a cavernous hall where Merrill L. (Pete) Petoskey, a wildlife biologist from Lewiston, Mich., delivered the opening prayer at the NRA's 118th annual meeting.
"Please help and guide the leaders of the National Rifle Association and of this nation to preserve and strengthen this freedom and this right.
"Amen."
Addressing the meeting, NRA President Foss acknowledged that the beleaguered group could, indeed, use more help.
If people are armed, it keeps the bad actors off the scene."
At the NRA's annual banquet that night, actor Charlton Heston evoked his famous movie image of Moses on the mountaintop as he provided the group with an inspirational boost.
Intoning the punch line of a defiant pro-gun slogan, he suggested that nobody was going to take this weapon from him unless it was pried "from my cold, dead hands!"
The 1,200 diners leaped up, roaring.
