Introduction:Of all the extravagant plans inspired by this week's solar eclipse, none beatsthe Earth Evacuation Project.
Also on E-day, July 11, crowded cruise ships will lingeroff Mexico's Pacific Coast, and thousands of U.S. tourists will drive southinto Baja California, which, usually boasting clear skies, is being billed asthe world's most promising site from which to view nature's own light show.
Most visitors will be funneled in through therelatively small airport at Kailua.
Airlines are adding scores of flightsto ferry thousands of people from neighboring islands in the hours just beforethe eclipse.
Car rental companies have shipped in 3,000 or so extra cars.
But Mexico will host the biggest share of travelers, partly because of itseasy access from the United States and partly since the eclipse will lastlongest here: up to seven minutes, which is three more minutes than themaximum length in Hawaii.
This will also be the longest-lasting total eclipseuntil 2132, according to Alan Dyer, an associate editor at Astronomymagazine.
In pre-Colombian times, eclipses were viewed as bad omens by thesun-worshiping Aztecs.
A thrivingtrade is also taking place in magnets, for those with low blood pressure tocarry in their pockets on July 11, and old copper coins for pregnant women toplace as charms in their belly buttons.
As in Hawaii, Mexico couldprobably use some otherworldly intervention to cope with the scores ofthousands of tourists who have already started arriving.
All are now booked up, and authorities fear competition at campsites.
Although Hawaii's isolation will limit the size of thecrowds, locals are still predicting problems.
"By God, there's just one roadon this island," a circle route that often narrows to two lanes, one shopowner said.
While authorities fret over infrastructure capacity, many Californians arepreparing to revel in a New Age wonderland.
Newspapers here are carrying frequentreminders not to stare directly at the sun.
During the eclipse, the mysticand the scientific will not be far apart.
Twenty miles downhill, at TheCrystal Grotto in Honomu, Wendy Gilliam is selling pouches of three stonescalled corona crystals and advising people to "expose them to the energy"during the eclipse. "
AT IT; If you want to watch the moon's progress across thesun: Don't look at it.
Staring at the sun during a partial eclipse couldquickly -- without your feeling a thing -- burn into your retina a permanentimage of the crescent sun, causing severe and permanent vision loss.
Other safemethods: (check) Pieces of arc-welders' glass labeled  14 and available atwelding supply stores.
Most welders' goggles are not suitable protection.
(check) Two or three layers of Mylar plastic heavily coated with aluminum.
How to watch it,including directions for a pinhole projector.
