Introduction:President Bush on Monday nominated Clarence Thomas, a conservative Republicanwith a controversial record on civil rights, to replace retiring JusticeThurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court.
If confirmed, the 43-year-oldjudge for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia would followMarshall as the second black to ascend to the court.
Thomas,barely half the age of the man whose seat he was named to fill, came of age inthe world that Marshall helped create.
Now the question is to what extentThomas would add weight to the court's new majority that appears willing todismantle important parts of the legacy that Marshall helped to build.
Opposes affirmative actionIn his year as a federal appeals court judge ,he has not ruled on affirmative action, but he has long been outspoken intaking the position that government affirmative-action programs are not onlyunwise but unconstitutional.
However, in other respects, this nominationis very much a wild card both for conservatives who jumped instantly toembrace it and for liberals whose responses ranged from cautious to hostile.
His views on other major issues before the court, including abortion,church-state relations and the definition of constitutional due process, areunknown.
Those views may well remain unknown through a confirmation processthat may be contentious but that in the end is not likely to derail thenomination.
Studied for priesthoodThomas attended Roman Catholicschools through college and studied for the priesthood.
Although the CatholicChurch vigorously opposes abortion, Thomas has apparently never taken a publicposition on abortion or on the dimensions of the constitutional right toprivacy, on which the right to abortion was based.
"My opposition to preferences andquotas not only is a constitutional, legal opposition, it has been a moral,ethical opposition," he said five years ago at a conference sponsored by theAnti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
In its most recentaffirmative-action decision, a year ago, the court split 5-4 in upholding aFederal Communications Commission policy that gives preference to blacks andmembers of other minorities in acquiring some radio and television licenses.
Marshall joined it.
The views of Justice David Souter,Brennan's successor, remain largely unknown.
Her reference wasto Souter's confirmation hearing last September, during which the nomineegracefully but firmly deflected questions on abortion.
Sen. HowardMetzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat who serves on the Judiciary Committee, endorsedMichelman's position.
"I'm through reading tea leaves and voting in thedark," he said.
If Thomas maintains his silence, his nomination is unlikely tofounder on the abortion issue alone.
Rights groups cautiousCivil rightsgroups took a cautious tone Monday, essentially noting "concerns" and sayingthey would study the record.
That was a generation ago, when the court was stillrewriting the ground rules by which Americans were to live their lives.
CLARENCE THOMAS; Born: June 23,1948, in Pinpoint, Ga. Education: B.A.
After the committee makes arecommendation, the nomination will be voted on by the full Senate.
