March rains nurtured grass that soon will turn tinder dry.
Unless anunusually cool summer intervenes, these are the ingredients for what couldbecome one of the worst wildfire seasons in California's history.
"The state'sreally a tinderbox this year.
But the county's wild landsare littered with heavy fuel -- brush and trees -- killed by the drought orthe December freeze.
Fires in there are going to be particularly hot, hard to put out," hesaid.
State forestry officials estimate 10 milliontrees -- Boyd called them "standing kindling" -- have died in California'swooded areas since the drought began.
"We preach every year for homeowners to take precautions(such as clearing brush from around their houses), and a lot of people don'tdo it," Mauldin said.
"Mauldin said the Morgan Hill rangerunit will begin manning some of its seasonal stations Monday, begin hiringsummer season firefighters June 3, and have all of the back-country stationsopened by July 1.The Morgan Hill unit covers parts of Santa Clara,Alameda, Contra Costa, Stanislaus, San Joaquin and Merced counties.
"We don't want to say this is the worst fire season in X years, but weare gearing up for it," said Ned MacKay, spokesman for the East Bay RegionalPark District.
"We have to be prepared.
California doesn't face the fire threat alone.
Officials at the federalBoise Interagency Fire Center in Idaho, which coordinates firefighting effortsthroughout the West, said parts of 11 states in the far West, and North Dakotaand Minnesota, also face major fire danger this year.
On some properties, such as those onthe ridge tops, the clear area should be as much as 100 feet wide.
Remove all pine needles and leaves from your roof, eaves andrain gutters.
Trim tree limbs within 10 feet of your chimney and trimall dead limbs hanging over your house or garage.
Install a sparkarrester on your chimney.
They are available at hardware stores.
Make surethere is adequate access for firefighters to get to your home, and ensure thatneighborhood streets are clearly identified.
Further information can beobtained from the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection's fireprevention unit in Morgan Hill, (408) 779-2121.Source: California Departmentof Forestry and Fire Protection  
