Introduction: The mood in the House majority leader's conference roomdarkened with each passing moment as leading Democraticcongressmen heard one of their party's most prominentpollsters report what the public thought about them.
Mr. Hart and a Republican cohort, Douglas Bailey,conducted six focus groups in July in three states --Illinois, Florida and Massachusetts -- to get a deeperfeeling of public opinion.
Another described it as "combustible.
"The Hart-Bailey report found the public "downbeat" aboutthe way the country is going, convinced that Washingtonpoliticians are "more concerned with politicalself-preservation" than with the public good.
Accordingly, these politicians may be in real trouble thisyear.
But a few daysafter the election, political analyst Alan Baron offered arevelation: For the first time since World War II the averagere-election margin of House incumbents from both partiesdeclined from the previous election.
Votersdon't want more conservative or more liberal representation;they want more responsive representation.
But there's little consensus among eitherpoliticians or the voters themselves on these issues.
Soprogress will be slow.
Congress can make some symbolic moves, however.
Granted,incumbents have little incentive to work against their narrowself-interest.
The nexus of many of theproblems -- entrenched arrogance, more concern for powerfulinterests than average citizens and the obscene preoccupationwith campaign contributions -- is the committee system.
The case is well articulated by two of the mostexperienced congressional observers: Richard Fenno, aUniversity of Rochester political scientist and author ofnumerous books on Congress, and Charles Ferris, an attorneywho served as chief counsel to both former Senate MajorityLeader Mike Mansfield and former House Speaker Thomas P.O'Neill.
Term limits really hit at democracy," says Prof.Fenno.
"But they see a lot of virtue in limiting committeeassignments.
If lawmakers had to change areas ofexpertise every three or four terms, "they wouldn't have theluxury of being intellectually lazy.
"Currently, the Intelligence committees in both houses andthe House Budget Committee limit members to six or eightyears.
Why shouldn't the Commerce committees and thetax-writing and appropriations panels be subjected to thesame limits?
Any loss of legislative expertise would be morethan offset by new ideas, new receptivity -- new thinking.
There'd be one other incalculable benefit.
This woulddrive the lobbyists crazy.
