Four officers took turns kicking and beatingan unresisting victim for more than two minutes.
Thesecriminals in uniform would not have dared their brutality hadthey feared that any of the 17 other police officers watchingwould report their criminal actions.
Blatant racist jokes and comments about the beating on thepolice communications system make it hard to believe thatthis was an "aberration" as Chief Daryl Gates claims.
Theculture of the department that allowed the brutalizing ofRodney Glen King was created under Mr. Gates's leadership.
Yet we, his fellow police chiefs, have for years remainedsilent about Mr. Gates, who yesterday was put on a 60-dayleave by the Los Angeles Police Commission.
A police chief plays an essential role in setting theclimate in which his department operates.
Through the yearsMr.
Gates has made public statements clearly at odds with thenew concept of community policing, in which officers workwith citizens to improve neighborhoods and prevent crime.
Indeed theRambo-like challenge did not lower violence, and may haveincreased it.
Hundreds of gang homicides occur every year inLos Angeles despite sweeps by the city's police.
Mr. Gates would have been better advised to seek communityprograms for jobs, education, elimination of prejudice andimprovement of neighborhoods.
But this kind of reasoning isforeign to a man who publicly claimed that his SWAT teamcould free the Iranian hostages.
The Police Corps wouldsend idealistic young people, including minorities, to servea three -- or four -- year tour of duty after collegegraduation in return for federal funding of their educations.
Mr. Gates opposed the Police Corps because its members wouldnot be professionals.
Such attitudes surviveonly in a closed police culture.
For example, Mr. Gates once said that blacks were more susceptible than"normal people" to chokeholds.
The nationality of the murdererwas irrelevant.
Mr. Gates's statement did nothing to lessenthe tragedy of the fallen officer, but like his statementabout blacks, it gave comfort to bigots within and outsidethe department.
Two years ago, on a national television documentary, Mr. Gates defended a special unit that had shot many criminalsduring stakeouts.
Last year Los Angeles paid $3 million to 52 residents ofan apartment complex ransacked by police.
Even more recently, Mr. Gates told theSenate that "casual drug users should be taken out and shot.
Mr. Gates saidthat while he was shocked, he wasn't drawing conclusions andwould look into the "background," of the incident.
Presumably, the chief has now received wiser council.
But condemnation of misconduct and excessive force shouldhave been a constant message from the command staff beforethe brutality, and not an afterthought.
Even Mr. Gates's apology to Mr. King sent the wrongmessage.
It is hard to imaginesomeone unlawfully beaten by uniformed officers as otherslooked on being inspired to respect law and order.
Or was thechief suggesting that the beating was a warning againstfurther run-ins with the police?Clearly, Daryl Gates's words and actions create doubtabout his claim that the Rodney King incident was anaberration.
Whenhe characterizes such opposition as cop-haters, he embittershis department and to some extent all police.
It is hard to see how the LosAngeles Police Department can regain credibility unless DarylGates's leave becomes permanent.
It has cast a cloud over policing that won't belifted until police chiefs drop their own code of silence andspeak out against one of their own's peculiar philosophy ofpolicing.
