The plan makes no provisions for continuing the cleanup beyondmid-September, and notes that 191 miles of lightly oiled coastlinemay not be cleaned mechanically at all, but be allowed to be washednaturally by the environment.
Since March 24, when an Exxon tanker struck a reef outsideValdez and poured more than 10 million gallons of North Slope crudeinto Prince William Sound, Exxon has financed cleanup crewsfighting the spreading sludge.
The oil company's strategy, which was submitted to state andfederal authorities only hours before a deadline expired, dividesAlaska's oil-tainted shores into four categories _ from the mostheavily polluted to those that are ``only lightly oiled.''
It covers polluted areas within Prince William Sound, as well asthose outside the immediate spill zone, and calls for nearly 3,400workers to participate in the cleanup.
The worst areas _ three miles of sludge-covered beaches onseveral small islands _ would be targeted immediately, with theothers scheduled for gradual cleansing through Sept. 15.
The gunk and sludge that resists treatment or salvage will beburned or buried, according to the Exxon study.
Both methods likelywill require exemptions from local environmental laws.
Coast Guard Adm. Paul A. Yost Jr., the ranking federal officialtracking the cleanup, told reporters in Sacramento, Calif. that hewould decide whether to approve the proposal within a week.
Yost is scheduled to arrive in Valdez on Tuesday to review thelatest plan.
The damage stretches along 260 miles of rocky, rugged coastlinesouthwestward from Cape Douglas some 500 miles from Valdez, parksuperintendent Ray Bane said Monday.
``The oil has made landfall in large quantities in Katmai Bayand Hallo Bay.
We have seen severalhundred sea otters swimming in oil.
The oil has had an impact onvirtually the entire coastline of the park,'' Bane said.
The 4 million-acre park also is a haven for brown bears, acoastal cousin of the grizzly.
In Anchorage, a group called the Boycott Exxon Alliance hasscheduled a rally in front of Exxon's Alaska headquarters.
The oil industry blames the spill and crude oil prices that haverisen $7 a barrel since January for higher prices at the gas pumps.
The animals depend on their thick fur forinsulation against the cold water but the oil ruins the insulationeffect.
