Introduction: An annual Agriculture Department surveyconfirmed Thursday that a deadening drought will curtail the fallcorn harvest by a third or more, resulting in higher retail foodprices for months and years to come.
The report came hours after President Reagan signed a $3.9billion relief bill that he acknowledged won't bring rain to cropsalready sweltering, but hopefully will help farmers survive toplant again next spring.
Sharp reductions also were reported for soybeans, wheat and anumber of other crops.
Cotton, which thrived last month in the hot,humid weather, is expected to increase from last year.
That matched thelow 1983 reading, when sharp cutbacks in government acreageprograms, along with drought, reduced crop production sharply.
The corn crop is expected to average 78.5 bushels per harvestedacre, down from 119.4 bushel per acre last year, a recordyear-to-year decline of 34 percent.
Corn is the largest and most important crop grown by Americanfarmers and, as a feed ingredient, is essential to the productionof meat, poultry and dairy products.
Assistant Secretary Ewen M. Wilson, the department's chiefeconomist, said the drought may add 1 percent to the cost of foodthis year, 2 percent next year.
``But becauseof large pre-season stocks, total supplies are enough in most casesto assure and adequate food supply at home, satisfy foreigncustomers and meet our food-aid commitments.''
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate AgricultureCommittee, said in a statement, ``Today's crop report confirms ourfears about the impacts of this summer's tragic drought.
Fortunately, it appears we will have enough stocks to make itthrough this marketing year.''
``But it will tide you over until normal weather and yourown skills permit you to return to your accustomed role.''
The new USDA crop estimates were based on field surveys as ofAug.
But those projections were revised downward a month ago to 5.2billion bushels, assuming farmers got normal weather the remainderof the season.
Production of all wheat was indicated at 1.82 billion bushels,down 13 percent from 2.1 billion produced in 1987.
The Julyprojection was 1.84 billion bushels The wheat total included winter wheat planted last fall, whichbarely stayed ahead of the drought.
Later plantings of durum andother spring wheat varieties were brutalized by heat and dryness.
Cotton production was estimated at 14.9 million bales, up 1percent from last year.
The crop was projected at 13.7 billionbales in July.
Department officials said U.S. grain production this year isexpected to total 192 million metric tons, 31 percent smaller thanthe 1987 output.
Wilson said USDA experts ``continue to believe that the droughtwill add only one percentage point'' to consumer food prices thisyear.
``Our figures here today would indicate that food production inother countries has not been cut that much,'' he said.
He scoffed at any suggestion, however, that the United Statesmay have lost its capacity to produce sizeable crop surpluses.
Henoted that 50 million farm acres are being kept out of productionthis year in addition to millions of additional acres in thelong-term Conservation Reserve Program.
``The drought, as you can see, is still basically with usthroughout the entire United States,'' Strommen said.
