That is the vexing question facing Mr LewisPreston, the former chairman of J P Morgan, the New York bank, who takesover as president of the World Bank this September.
Mr Preston may relax on one count.
Horrific inequality abounds.
In Mexico, life expectancy for the poorest 10per cent is 20 years less than for the richest 10 per cent.
Most reports are mixed. '
The morale of staff is lousy,' says Mr Charles Flickner, asenior analyst on the Senate Budget Committee and close observer of thebank.
Although nowwell-liked (partly for championing causes such as women's rights in theThird World), many observers say he never fully recovered from a rocky startinvolving a divisive internal reorganisation of the bank.
Mr Robert McNamara, a forceful chief executive in the1970s, built a presidential institution that responded to firm leadershipfrom the top.
But neither Mr Conable nor his predecessor, Mr A W 'Tom'Clausen, a commercial banker, could fill his shoes.
For a decade the bankhas effectively been run by two senior - and strong-willed -vice-presidents: Mr Ernest Stern (who nearly left last year to join theEBRD) and Mr Moeen Qureshi.
Mr Preston's first challenge, says Mr Mistry, will be to wrest control ofthe bank from Messrs Stern and Qureshi; his second, to prune legions of'useless advisers' and install managers with real-world experience.
Histhird, one might add, will be quickly to establish his independence from theUS Treasury which always browbeats a newcomer.
What kind of development legacy will Mr Preston inherit?
Real percapita incomes have declined substantially in sub-Saharan Africa and theMiddle East, and mildly in Latin America.
Under the plan official agencies assume some of the burdenof developing countries' private debts on condition that they implementmarket-oriented economic reforms.
'The Brady plan is enough,' says Mr Williamson, if developing countries arewilling to embrace reform and if it is matched by greater forgiveness ofofficial debt.
Officials such as Mr David Mulford of the US Treasury say therecent forgiveness of about half of Poland's official debt will not set aprecedent for other debtors.
Mr Williamson laughs. '
'It is not so much more deservingthan other countries.
'But why was a Brady-type solution not launched much earlier?
Theresult of delay and compound interest is a total debt burden today of someDollars 1,341bn compared with a relatively manageable Dollars 639bn in 1980.
'The bank failed to take a timely leadership position on the debt crisis,'concludes Mr Richard Feinberg, director of the Overseas Development Councilin Washington.
)As incoming president, Mr Preston must review the bank's strategies forpromoting development.
The main innovation of the 1980s was a switch fromproject lending to 'structural adjustment' lending.
But studies indicate the results have been fairly unimpressive.
This is bothbecause countries failed to abide by the loan conditions and because thebank's policies were sometimes misguided.
Professor John Toye, director ofthe Institute for Development Studies at Sussex University, recentlycompleted an exhaustive analysis of bank programmes.
He says thebank was naive to expect entrepreneurs to respond to the austerity ofadjustment by increasing investment.
How can the bank do better in the 1990s?
One problem is that it has lostleverage over many Third World governments.
According to MrLawrence Summers, the bank's chief economist, net transfers over the nextfive years will be about Dollars 2 per person in the developing worldcompared with Dollars 9 (in current prices) in the late 1970s.
The EBRD's constitution requiresborrowers to be 'committed to and applying the principles of multi-partydemocracy, pluralism and market economics'.
The World Bank operatesunder very different rules: its charter requires it to be non-political andonly its small affiliate, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), canmake direct loans to private businesses.
The EBRD isministering to a region that has historical ties with western Europe andthat has declared its commitment to democracy and free markets.
Most analysts, however, say the bank should tighten up a little.
Indeed, one conclusion of Prof Toye's analysis is that policy-based loanswould have a greater chance of success if they included measures to expandthe role of the state in poorer countries alongside measures to promoteeconomic liberalisation.
Sir William Ryrie, the head of the IFC, says the objective of a large volumeof public lending to the private sector is wrong-headed. '
Itwanted to impose on developing countries policies that had become recentlyfashionable in the industrialised world.
But the notion that economicliberalisation alone is sufficient is increasingly questioned.
The bank'sown research department is highlighting the need to relieve poverty directlyand to improve fundamentals, such as education, nutrition and health care.
He argues thatthe best way of stimulating growth and improving income distribution is toput resources into education and primary health care.
Ideas arecertainly important, but they do not build hospitals or schools.
More moneycould be made available: a mere 10 per cent cut in western defence spending,for example, would pay for a doubling of official aid.
Rather than tamelyaccepting the status quo, Mr Preston could use his platform to promote amore constructive attitude in rich countries.
Domestic investment as % of GNP                                  1975-82         1983-90All developing countries            26.7            23.6Africa                              26.4            19.4Middle East 26.3            23.4Latin America &amp; Caribbean           23.3            18.3Asia                                27.9            28.9 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source:
By region (Fiscal 1990)Billion dollars          Gross           NetSub-Sahara Africa 2.70           1.98Asia                      6.27 3.72Europe , Middle East andN Africa 2.57           0.39Latin America &amp; Caribbean 6.16           3.25 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source: World Bank -----------------------------------------------------------------------
