Introduction: A B-52 bomber crashed and burst intoflames early today on a runway while practicing ``touch-and-go''landings at K.I.
Sawyer Air Force Base, officials said.
All eightcrew members survived.
During such maneuvers, landing gears touch the ground butthe plane doesn't land.
The crew members crawled orwere helped out of the front section of the aircraft, he said.
Senior Airman Tim Sanders, another base spokesman, said thoseaboard were Capt.
Mark Hartney, 29, an aircraft commander fromMulberry, Fla.; 1st Lt. Michael S. Debruzzi, 26, a pilot from NewBrighton, Minn.; Capt.
Anthony D. Phillips, 28, a radar navigatorfrom Folkston, Ga.; 1st Lt. James W. Herrmann, 30, a navigator fromSharpsville, Pa.; 1st Lt. Daniel McCarrick, 25, an electronicwarfare officer from Succasunna, N.J.; Airman 1st Class, Joseph A.Vallie, 20, a gunner from Stephenson, Mich.; Maj. William R.Kroeger, 52, an instructor pilot from Fountain Hills, Ariz.; and 1stLt.
Gregory C. Smith, 26, an upgrade pilot from Henning, Minn. Allwere based at Sawyer.
Ann Parent, a spokeswoman for Marquette General Hospital, saidHartney and Debruzzi were in fair condition, Phillips and Valliewere in stable condition, McCarrick was in satisfactory conditionand Kroeger was in serious condition.
Anita Bailey.
``We are counting our blessings,'' Bailey said.
``You can putparts of a plane back together, but you cannot put people backtogether.''
The accident was classified as the most serious kind, and allaircraft exercises at Sawyer were canceled even though runways otherthan the one where the crash occurred remained open, Bailey said.
Peck said it was not unusual for B-52 training missions to be outat that hour.
``Crews have to be trained to fly at any time of the day or nightin any weather,'' he said.
The last B-52 wascommissioned in 1962.
No one was injured.
A B-52 bomber with radar problems crashed in Arizona'a MonumentValley in October 1984, killing two crew members, after its wingsclipped a mesa.
Although smaller than the B-52, the B-1Bcan fly at supersonic speeds and carry more bombs.
Four B-1Bs have crashed in the four years the plane has beenflying, including two nine days apart in November.
No one was killed in either crash and investigators have notdisclosed what caused the accidents.
Six crewmen died and 10 were injured Oct. 11 when an Air Forcetanker en route from K.I.
Wurtsmith and Sawyer are Michigan's two SAC bases.
