Management sources at TransManche Link, the constructionconsortium building the ``Chunnel'' - the Channel Tunnel -confirmed the historic linkup occurred about 8:25 p.m. when Britishworkers sent the probe through to French colleagues.
``This is Europe inpractice.''
Eight workers suffered injuries, two seriously, about 90 minuteslater when a tractor towing supplies rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
The cost of the project has soared from an initial estimate of$9.4 billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion forunforeseen cost overruns.
The meeting point was just over 13{ miles southeast ofShakespeare Cliff, the British terminus near the town of Dover, and10 miles northwest of the French town of Sangatte, near Calais.
Geological conditions account forthe different progress on each side.
Thefirst champagne corks popped minutes later.
``It's an exciting moment.
It's the first time we have airpassing between the two tunnels,'' said Gordon Crighton, tunnelengineering manager.
``We see it as just another exercise, but I'm sure there will bea lot of parties going on,'' he said.
Preliminary tests indicated the two halves were 20 inches out ofalignment.
Another day will be needed to be certain, technicianssaid, but they called the line-up ``exceptional,'' considering themassive boring machines are drilling holes about three storieshigh.
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole to permit passagefrom one half to the other.
They are expected to greet each otherwith handshakes in a few weeks.
Two Japanese-designed boring machines are drilling the tunnel.
A work slowdown since last week by militant tunnelers demandingmore pay on the French side appeared likely Monday to stall thelinkup until the weekend or beyond.
But TransManche officials said earlier Tuesday that the meetingin the middle would occur on schedule.
The first coupling of the two railtunnels is scheduled for mid-1991.
Eurotunnel PLC, the world's largest engineering project,announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreement with its banks on$3.5 billion in new credit.
A study released last Friday in Paris by transportation expertssaid the tunnel's completion will aggravate traffic congestion in awide area of continental Europe.
Five Britishfirms were ordered last Wednesday to stand trial on charges relatedto the death of a construction worker last year.
The undersea bond between the two hereditary enemies wasenvisioned nearly 200 years ago by a French engineer called AlbertMathieu.
Napoleon wanted to build it, but Britain warned him off.
Tunneling actually started in subsequent efforts in 1882 and 1974,but were abandoned.
