Proposition 131 would limit statewide elected officials to two consecutive four-year terms, state legislators to 12 consecutive years in office; Proposition 140 would hold Assembly members to six years in office, state senators and statewide elected officials to eight.
Would passage of such measures be likely to spur similar legislation in other states, or at the federal level?
The Times asked six legislators and legislative specialists.
Richard L. Mountjoy, member of the state Assembly (R-Monrovia), first elected in 1978, a former general contractor who has served as mayor and city councilman of Monrovia (1968-76): By 1996, there would be all new faces.
I think it will return the Legislature to more of a citizen-type legislator.
The Legislature, right now, is controlled by those people who have a vested interest in legislation.
I knew how to get things done.
I think that the legislative committee hearings are nothing more than City Council meetings on different subject matters.
I think there would be people from all walks of life.
I think the age bracket would creep up a little more.
Folks who want to do it as a public service.
They are not really accountable to anyone except their employers.
It would become clear rather quickly that you have a bunch of elected amateurs trying to run a very complex, complicated system of state government.
We have a population of about 30 million people.
So, governing the state of California .
Well, there are some of them that are almost not solvable.
But legislatures also need strong committee chairmen, and term limits mean that relatively inexperienced people are going to be in leadership and that they are -- by definition -- lame ducks from the very beginning.
That is probably the most negative impact.
There has been a national movement that started in California, 25 years ago, to really strengthen the role of legislatures and to make them co-equal branches of government; things like term limitations, which would restrict the power and authority of legislatures, are a step backward in that movement.
It would mean that, in relative terms, the legislatures would cede more power and authority to the executive branch, to lobbyists and to legislative staff.
Mark P. Petracca, assistant professor of politics and society, UC Irvine: The national effect would be very impressive because, unlike Oklahoma (where voters recently approved a 12-year-limit on legislators), which does not have a reputation for being in the vanguard of political change in America, California does.
Because it is the largest political state in the country, a success for either proposition here is likely to have spinoff moves around the country.
a demand for a constitutional amendment to do the same.
The parties could be helped by this .
people would have to become more dependent on the party for funding and for guidance, and less dependent on the special interests.
The big problem is that nationally -- or locally -- we do not have a culture that encourages and rewards public service for short periods of time.
That is why we created what, in effect, is a professional elite to govern us.
Representation does not occur well then.
Antonia Hernandez, president of the Mexican-American Legal Defense Fund: The Schabarum initiative (Proposition 140, backed by Los Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum), with a six-year limit (for Assembly members), would have an adverse effect on the Latino community.
We have begun to look at whether it would violate the Voting Rights Act.
Running for election is a very expensive proposition.
For minorities who do not have a financial base, it is usually extremely hard to raise the money .
well-financed, well-organized candidates who are supported by other communities will have a much better chance.
If there are constant changes, the impact of term limits would be to empower the bureaucracy -- the people who are not elected -- and (they) would definitely empower the special interests who have the finances and the ability to assist the bureaucrats.
Being an elected official takes experience.
The first two years you are just finding your way around; the second two you are just hitting your stride, and in the third two years, you are on your way out (if 40 passed).
It just doesn't make sense.
There are a lot of problems with our political process, but this is not the solution.
Gary C. Jacobson, fellow, Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University; professor of political science, UC San Diego: The standard argument is that the legislative branch would be weakened.
Instead of worrying about what their constituents think, as it gets toward the end of their term, legislators are going to be worried about what their next employer thinks, possibly in the private sector, or in their next constituency, which will not necessarily share the same interests as the one that elected them.
If you give someone a job, for instance, and tell them that no matter how well they do it, they will be fired, the incentive to do that job well is not there.
