The map was released as the state Department of Forestry officially opened the region's 1990 fire season, which means its firefighting crews have been placed on higher alert and various fire prevention regulations are now in effect.
While the fire-season announcement came only two to three weeks earlier than usual in the vulnerable foothills, it was a full two months ahead of schedule in the heavily wooded mountain terrain of Southern California's national forests.
"Unless we get a hurricane or something -- and that's not very likely -- we're going to have a very bad year."
Rowley said other Western states also are experiencing drought, "which means they won't be able to send us the firefighting forces they normally can deploy out here.
It doesn't look good."
Los Angeles, which has an annual average of 14.93 inches of rainfall, has received 6.18 inches so far this season, promising to make this the driest season in 30 years.
He said healthy trees repel the insects with a flow of pitch that suffocates them and forces them out of the bark.
But during the current dry spell, the trees haven't been able to produce enough sap to rid themselves of the beetles.
Rowley said the insects have proliferated, killing vast stands of pines and leaving tinder-dry fuel for fires.
In foothill districts closer to Los Angeles, a fungus that preys upon drought-weakened brush has killed as much as 60% of the chaparral in some portions of the Santa Monica and San Gabriel mountains.
Officials said large patches of this dead and dying brush now mottle the hillsides, ready to burst into flame at the slightest spark.
And because of the drought, even the live brush is more incendiary than usual, officials said.
Capt.
Each densely thicketed acre of hillside chaparral contains about 60 tons of brush, he said, and that 60 tons has about the same fuel energy as 3,750 gallons of gasoline. "
Then, if you put 80 m.p.h.
The county Fire Department map shows that the most threatened residential areas include a number of hillside and canyon communities within the city of Los Angeles, including parts of Baldwin Hills, Hollywood, the Los Feliz district, Tarzana, Encino, Sherman Oaks, Sunland and Sylmar.
Especially threatened suburban communities include portions of Rolling Hills, Rancho Palos Verdes, Beverly Hills, Glendale, Pasadena, Altadena, Arcadia, Monrovia, Bradbury, Duarte, Azusa, Glendora, Claremont and Whittier.
Fire officials say these are areas where blazes can start and expand rapidly, spreading from open land to homes and other structures.
Do not not store firewood, trash or other combustibles within 30 feet of any building.
Exhaust sparks and hot mufflers start many wildfires.
In case of fire, turn off all tap water unless instructed otherwise.
Indiscriminate use of water can lower the pressure to those who need it to fight the blaze.
