Introduction: Around the world, national theologies are crumbling: communism, apartheid and, here in America, the worship of guns -- to foreigners, the single craziest thing about us.
Do you sense an outbreak of sanity about gun control?
I do.
There was retired Chief Justice Warren Burger preaching sacrilege on the cover of Parade magazine a couple of weeks ago.
A Time Magazine/Cable News Network poll reports that 87% of gun owners themselves favor a seven-day waiting period for handgun purchases; three-quarters favor registration of semi-automatic weapons and handguns, and half favor registration of rifles and shotguns.
Most right thinkers take comfort in that funny stuff about the militia.
Since the amendment's stated purpose is arming state militias, they reason, it creates no individual right to own a gun.
But would civil-libertarians be so stinting about an amendment they felt more fond of?
Say, the First?
But liberals reject the notion that free speech is therefore limited to political topics, even broadly defined.
True, that purpose is not inscribed in the amendment itself.
The most thorough parsing of the Second Amendment is a 1983 article in the Michigan Law Review by Don Kates, a gun enthusiast.
But Kates has other bullets in his belt.
If there is a good reply to Kates's fusillade, the controllers haven't made it.
What are the limits?
(No nuclear bombs.)
He says that the amendment places no limit on mandatory registration or laws against concealed weapons in public.
This list seems quite reasonable and moderate, though where it all comes from is not clear.
In suggesting, for example, that it would be fine to ban automatic rifles but not semi-automatics, Kates is slicing the constitutional salami pretty thin.
The downside of having a Bill of Rights is that the protection of individual rights usually entails social costs.
Talking and writing are as central to American democracy as they ever were; shooting just isn't.
Gun nuts are unconvincing (at least to me) in their attempts to argue that the individual right to bear arms is still as vital to freedom as it was in 1792.
