Introduction:   America's 1988 drought captured attentioneverywhere, but especially in Washington where politicians pushedthrough the largest disaster relief measure in U.S. history.
An Associated Press study conducted over seven months found thedrought relief bill paid cash to farmers for everything fromhail-damaged kiwi fruit in California to heat-stressed radicchio inMassachusetts, rain-bloated tomatoes in New Jersey and washed-outbird seed in Colorado.
Payments went far beyond the initial intent to save Midwesterngrain growers from bankruptcy, an effort _ supported by almosteveryone _ that simply grew and grew and grew.
At each step, the program was broadened.
Congress began with abill to aid drought victims.
Then floods.
Nothing in federal procedures,however, requires paperwork to be forwarded to higher officials forroutine approval or checking.
By the end of this October, about one-quarter of all U.S.farmers had collected on damage to most of 506 eligible crops andjust about any kind of weather peril in 49 states.
The taxpayers'tab ran to $3.9 billion.
Although some producers appeared to have violated eligibilityrequirements _ exceeding the allowed gross annual income, forexample _ their requests for aid were approved anyway by localofficials.
As tough as farming is, they'd be fools not to take whatwas offered, they said.
Government officials say they did the best they could with arushed program.
Loopholes were tightened in 1989's smaller $1billion drought relief program.
``Some farmers just got grandfathered in, that's true,'' saidDan Shaw, deputy administrator of the Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service, which administers payment programs forthe Agriculture Department.
``What percentage, we don't know.
Whenever you dothis for the whole nation, there are some people that luck out.''
The AP found some farmers who did better than just luck out.
Disaster payments in several states also went to banks,corporations, investment firms, churches and even local governmentssuch as the city of Littlefield, Texas, despite regulationsdesigned to match benefits to small farmers.
Santa Fe Pacific Co., the railroad giant with annual revenue of$3 billion, received a check through its energy division.
TheAmerican Cancer Society got a check, as did a unit of Texas A&amp;MUniversity and the mid-Atlantic headquarters in Baltimore of theJesuit order.
In North Dakota, the hardest-hit state, farmers lost anestimated $1.1 billion to the drought, but direct federal aid cutthat by 36 percent, to $706 million.
Without that money, ``it would have meant substantially morelosses to Main Street,'' Cochran said.
To examine the program, the AP interviewed agriculture expertsin 21 states then chose 14 states whose rainfall data and droughtpayments were matched county by county in a computer database.
Fromthose results, the AP selected 120 counties for further study.
Farm Entitlement reports, the ASCS summaries of individualfarms' participation in the program, were requested for about12,000 farms in those counties under the Freedom of Information Act.
One such farmer was Don Gresham, who raises cotton on 4,000acres near Levelland.
Because of hail damage, Gresham and his companies collected$248,662 from the drought program, plus $159,478 from federal cropinsurance.
According to government program formulas, Gresham grossed nearly$100,000 more than had he grown his cotton successfully.
``I'll be the first to tell you it worked out to a good year forme,'' Gresham said.
``You can't farm without the government.
Youplay their game.
