-- for "highly respected."
And to many on Capitol Hill, Mr. Conable still is.
After a year and a half in office, he has failed to move the bank into a leadership role on the Third World debt problem. "
Rep. John LaFalce, a New York Democrat and another leader on the issue, agrees.
So far, Mr. Conable has approached the debt crisis more like a cautious financier than a bold politician.
Mr. Conable subscribes to the "Baker Plan," which stresses new lending by commercial banks and the World Bank to debtor countries that adopt growth-oriented, market-based economic reforms.
The bank has tried to help the countries by tiding them over with some new loans.
Defending his approach to the debt problem, Mr. Conable explains: "We aren't a financial institution but a development institution.
We can't go to our member countries and say, 'Give us a tremendous capital increase so we can assume the obligations of all these other creditors that a developing country owes.'
But critics reject that view.
Even some Reagan administration officials privately despair of Mr. Conable's leadership and fear that it may have been a mistake to appoint him.
While financial experts often urge the bank to do more, the ponderous institution has intervened only about half a dozen times in debt crises, usually just to guarantee a small portion of a commercial-bank loan package.
Mr. Conable makes it clear that it won't do that often.
It's a bad idea.
Because of "chronic debt problems .
2 man, Operations Vice President Moeen Qureshi.
He adds, "It seems to me it will be desirable, in the present environment, to see what can be done" to reduce debt, rather than just lend new money.
Partly in response to the external and internal pressures, Mr. Conable sent a debt study to his board early in April.
But conspicuously absent from the report, which discussed debt-relief proposals from Secretary Baker, Sen. Bradley and others, were any ideas from the bank itself.
The World Bank's ethos is decidedly traditional.
Founded in 1944, it has evolved into a well-paid bureaucracy of 6,000 working in 17 buildings a few blocks from the White House, ignored by tourists but a mandatory stop for finance ministers and bankers visiting Washington.
The bank earns more than $1 billion annually, sports a top credit rating in securities markets and lent nearly $18 billion last year.
The U.S. is its biggest shareholder and controls the president's job.
The idea of the bank was to finance a wide range of economically basic construction across the developing world: roads in Africa, power projects in Asia, schools in Latin America, irrigation in India.
Under Robert McNamara, the bank began aiding efforts to alleviate rural poverty, control population growth and fight illiteracy.
Under A.W.
But his main achievements have been bureaucratic.
He set up staffs to handle environmental and women's issues.
One of these is the "Safe Motherhood Initiative," a project designed to lower the high rate of deaths during childbirth, especially in Africa.
Funds will be increased for related health and nutrition programs.
Mr. Conable spent roughly a year reorganizing the bank so that project experts and country experts would work more closely.
"We had a 100% support of our budget .
Traditionally, conservatives have criticized the bank, charging that its policies promote central planning and thus discourages market forces.
"Who is calling the shots on debt policy in the administration?
The Treasury.
The Treasury," Sen. Bradley contends.
"They appointed somebody that they knew they could control.
Maybe Conable genuinely agrees with Baker, in which case he should be lumped in with Baker for criticism.
Bank staffers cite a loan to Chile last year over U.S. opposition.
The bank has accelerated lending to the 17 most heavily indebted countries.
But the new money is being swamped by interest payments, and commercial banks are putting up little new money of their own.
Also that year, the World Bank took back in repayments $291 million more than it pumped into the three largest Latin debtors -- Brazil, Mexico and Argentina.
However, that again was more than offset by commercial-bank outflows.
Like Secretary Baker, Mr. Conable instinctively dismisses sweeping debt-relief plans as coercive or non-market-oriented.
He rejects any notion that the bank might get involved in directly refinancing or providing security for debt on a broad scale.
"We are not there to try and handle their short-term debt problems, and if you think we are, then I think you misunderstand the nature of this institution," he says.
"Barber Conable is an outstanding person," he says.
"He had a strong identity here in Congress, which he earned.
His reputation now rests on how he defines himself."
