Introduction:   Less than a month before elections, theassassination of a third presidential candidate has pushed Colombiato the brink of political chaos.
After the shooting of candidate Carlos Pizarro in a jetlinerThursday, the country's largest newspaper implored the governmentto ``do something, for the love of God.''
Addressing President Virgilio Barco, the El Tiempo editorialsaid: ``In your hands, and only in your hands, is the power toavoid the country's dissolution.''
``The gravest aspect of Colombia's bloodletting is that thegovernment has no idea how to even slow it,'' said a member of aregional human rights committee based in Medellin, the cocainecapital.
In recent interviews, Pizarro, the candidate for the leftistApril 19 Movement, or M-19, admitted he was afraid.
Sen. Luis Carlos Galan ofthe ruling Liberal Party was gunned down last August at a politicalrally in Bogota, and Bernardo Jaramillo of the leftist PatrioticUnion Party was killed last month at the Bogota airport.
But theMedellin cartel denied involvement, and no government official hasyet said who was responsible for Pizarro's assassination.
On Saturday Antonio Navarro, a longtime guerrilla leader of theApril 19 Movement, announced he would take Pizarro's place ascandidate for president.
Traffickers have carried out a terrorist campaign that haskilled nearly 300 Colombians in the past nine months in an effortto halt the government's campaign to capture and extradite drugbarons to the United States.
Bombings by the Medellin cartel have caused millions of dollarsin property damage, led to the militarization of Medellin and othercities and shattered the nerves of citizens.
Former president Alfonso Lopez said the assassinations of threecandidates indicated that Colombia's armed forces must bereorganized.
Official investigations have shown that certain members of thearmed forces are allied with drug traffickers and the country'sright-wing death squads.
One of the country's presidential candidates, Alvaro Gomez, saidFriday that Barco should name a three-man council to run Colombia'ssecurity forces to avoid a military coup.
``Never has there been such a great and pathetic image ofanarchy,'' said Gomez, a presidential candidate of the ConservativeParty.
Barco, of the Liberal Party, rejected Gomez's suggestion of atriumvirate, saying the armed forces would be reorganized only ifnecessary.
Continuing to focus on a military solution to Colombia'sproblems, Barco said late Friday he would double the size of a3,000-man anti-terrorist police unit.
Both Barco and his party's presidential candidate, CesarGaviria, have linked Colombia's salvation to constitutional reform.
Through such reforms they hope to reform the corrupted Congress,strengthen the judicial system and provide more politicalrepresentation for minority parties.
