-- Eva Mitrova, a visiting researcher at theNational Institutes of Health here, unrolls a map of hernative Czechoslovakia and points to Poltar, a village wherethe strange deaths started.
One day in 1975, a 49-year-old journalist there complainedto a doctor that he couldn't concentrate.
Thus began another chapter in one of medicine's mostbizarre mysteries, a tale of sick sheep and mad cows,cannibals and Pennsylvanians, ancient life forms and a catnamed Max.
The plot revolves around a family of braindiseases, probably variations of a single disorder, calledspongiform encephalopathy.
It is infectious, invariably fataland as insidious as termites, sometimes eating away braincells for years without detection before a critical mass isspongified.
Then, over a few months, motor control bucklesand cognition crumbles.
Now, after decades of detective work, medical sleuthsappear to be closing in on the molecular culprits behind thedisease.
1 -- the disease is rare -- but it may pay off in abig way because the findings could shed light on more commonkillers, including Alzheimer's disease.
The uncanny nature of the disorder sometimes gripsscientists with a kind of obsessive fascination, notes NIHresearcher D. Carleton Gajdusek.
He should know, havingchased spongiform leads around the globe for 33 years and wona Nobel Prize in the process.
Recently the fascination hastaken on a more anxious cast as the disease has struck humansand animals with suspicious regularity in several places,underscoring a longstanding question: Do people get thedisease from animals?The question has burned with special intensity sincescrapie, the form of the disease in sheep, jumped to Britishcattle a few years ago after they were fed ground-up parts ofinfected sheep.
About 20,000 British cattle have beendestroyed since 1986 in hopes of eradicating the spongiform"mad cow" disease, which makes the animals jittery beforethey keel over.
A few weeks ago, the first confirmed case of mad cowdisease outside Britain turned up in Switzerland.
U.S. meatproducers have reason to be anxious about this because theincidence of scrapie has been rising in American sheep sincethe mid-1980s, says Richard Marsh, a University of Wisconsinscrapie expert.
Scientists agree, however, that the disease in animalsprobably poses little danger to people.
Scrapie has existedfor centuries and "the world is bathed" in its infectiousagent, says Dr. Gajdusek.
Yet sheep have never been stronglyimplicated in cases of the human form of the disease,Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, or CJD.
At least not until thePoltar journalist and two other people died of CJD at aboutthe same time in a rural, sheep-herding part of easternCzechoslovakia.
When Dr. Mitrova, a researcher at a Bratislava medicalinstitute, heard of the unusual cluster of cases, she decidedto investigate.
From the first, one clue stood out like abloodstain: "Almost all of the people are involved in raisingand taking care of sheep," she says.
Against all odds, CJD has struck again and again in the sameregion, called Slovakia -- 69 times since 1975, mainlygrouped in two areas.
The outbreak has become something of anepidemic around the Orava area, where 26 cases have occurredsince 1987, a rate hundreds of times higher than normal forCJD.
"That's a leap of folklore, though, and the sheep link maywell turn out to be false, cautions Dr. Mitrova.
Indeed, CJDis a nefarious trickster; the first reported case of thedisease, which entered medical texts in the 1920s, reallywasn't CJD after all, scientists now believe.
Thatyear, the NIH's Dr. Gajdusek, then a young scientist castingabout for big questions, planned a trip to Papua New Guineato visit a friend.
En route, he heard that a primitive New Guinea tribe, theFore, were dying in droves from an unknown brain disorderthey called kuru, "the shivering disease," because it startedwith tremors.
Fascinated, he dropped everything, plunged intothe backwoods with a local doctor and took charge ofinvestigating the affair, to the great annoyance ofAustralian authorities then overseeing the area.
has an intelligence quotient up in the180s and the emotional immaturity of a 15-year-old," one ofhis mentors warned the Australians in a letter, and "won'tlet danger, physical difficulty, or other people's feelingsinterfere in the least with what he wants to do."
Soon kuru victims' brains started issuing from the heartof darkness to distant medical centers, compliments of Dr.
Gajdusek.
He swapped axes and salt for autopsy rights,dissecting one victim with a carving knife by lantern-lightin a native hut during a howling storm, according to hisletters home.
He and the local doctor, Vincent Zigas, triedeverything from tranquilizers to hormones on kuru patients.
Two years later, William Hadlow, a U.S. veterinarian, sawa picture of one of the kuru brains in a medical journal andwas struck by its spongy appearance.
He had seen that lookbefore in scrapie, the sheep disease, and put in a call tothe NIH.
Another link fell into place when Igor Klatzo, anNIH scientist, noticed kuru brains resembled ones from CJDvictims.
Based on the clues, Dr. Gajdusek, back at NIH, led studiesin the 1960s showing kuru, CJD and scrapie to be essentiallythe same infectious disease, studies that won the 1976 NobelPrize for medicine.
The discoveries confirmed along-suspected connection: The kuru outbreak sprang from aFore mourning ritual, in which relatives ate their deceasedkin's lightly cooked, and often kuru-infected, brains.
It somehow could hide in the brain for decades withoutcausing the usual signs of infection, such as fever.
Braintissue of infected animals could transmit the disease wheninjected into different animals' brains, yet microscopesrevealed no signs of infectious microbes.
And why did theagent sporadically appear in people with no known exposure?It seemed like "biological spontaneous combustion," says NIHresearcher Paul Brown.
In the early 1980s, scientists discovered that CJD, likeAlzheimer's disease, often gums up the brain with a kind ofjunk, or "amyloid," protein.
Further studies showed the junkmainly contains a botched form of a naturally occurring brainprotein, sometimes called a prion.
But their theory entails a biologically weird premise:that the altered protein replicates itself without the aid ofgenetic material, the basis of all known reproduction.
Ifthey're
right,
such self-replicating proteins might berepresentatives of an ancient twilight zone between life andnonlife-evolution's bridge between molecules and microbes.
When formed in a brain cell, a molecule of such stuff mightbe "like a bad apple in a barrel converting all the otherapples," says the NIH's Dr. Brown.
A hot question: Does theamyloid in Alzheimer's disease form similarly?All this, however, doesn't explain what happened after Dr.
Brown baked isolates of the disease agent for an hour at 680degrees
Fahrenheit, a temperature that melts proteins.
Heinjected the ashy residue into animals' brains, expectingnothing to happen.
The results may be "verydisquieting," he says, to British farmers, who have beenburning and burying mad cow corpses.
Still, Dr. Brown and other scientists aren't much worriedabout mad cows because their animal studies show spongiformdisease is very hard to transmit orally.
Examining his brain, a veterinarian found a telltalesponginess, sparking another round of panic in the U.K. aboutspongiform disease.
Now more than 10 British cats have diedof it, suggesting brains from infected sheep or cows got intocat food.
Meanwhile, yet another spongiform outbreak has occurred,this time among northeastern Pennsylvanians.
The cluster ofmore than a dozen CJD cases "isn't an epidemic" and appearsto have topped out in 1989, says Brian Little, an Allentownneuropathologist leading a study of it.
But it is worrisomebecause, like the Slovakian outbreak, it suggests a commonunderlying cause that could strike again.
During the past few months, the NIH team, working with Dr.
Mitrova, has found a thread that for the first time may linkmany such CJD cases.
But Dr. Brown's excitement grew when three other,unrelated CJD victims were found to carry the same geneticdefect.
"On a flyer," he says, "I called relatives of thevictims and struck gold."
They were all of Eastern Europeandescent, suggesting people of similar ancestry might carrythe gene.
Since then, the team has confirmed that many of theSlovakian CJD victims, and a cluster of Libyan-born Jewswhose tissues were preserved, carried the defect.
The findings haveopened the door for early diagnosis and possible preventionof
CJD.But they also have introduced a new riddle, says Dr.
Gajdusek: Why has the genetic defect, which has apparentlyexisted for decades in some Eastern Europeans, turned deadlyonly in the past 15 years or so? "
