But the environmental activists, who momentarily disrupted a House hearingto unfurl a 15 foot anti-Nafta banner, saw their stunt repeated again andagain on evening news shows.
With dozens of similar exploits and clever strategic planning, grassrootsorganisations have succeed in fanning anti-Nafta sentiment into widespreadpublic hostility against the pact with Canada and Mexico.
The continued economic sluggishness and the drumbeat of corporate layoffannouncements have hurt the pact's chances and presented the administrationwith a formidable challenge.
Fifty per cent of the Americans polleddisagreed with the administration's argument that more jobs will be createdthan lost and 54 per cent said that wages would be forced downward so thatUS companies and workers could compete with Mexico.
Pro-Nafta congressmen and senators have been morosely admitting theopposition's success in framing the debate against Nafta as a pact whichwould cost jobs.
But they took heart from Tuesday's presidential show: President Clinton'spassionate insistence that the realities of the global marketplace be faced;President Carter's attack on Mr Ross Perot, the populist billionaire, as ademagogue with 'unlimited financial resources,'; President Bush's praise ofMexican President Carlos Salinas; President Ford's warning that the countrywould be overrun by impoverished immigrants from the South if they are givenno work at home.
'To keep the pro-Nafta case before the public, President Clinton Wednesdaytook off for New Orleans and top officials in his administration fanned outon speaking tours across the country.
Government agencies have beenmobilised for the battle, given pro-Nafta literature and instructed to boostthe pact in seminars and public forums.
It is believed this process may satisfy some of the Congressionaldoubters, who are demanding a 'level playing field' and a speedup of Mexicantariff reductions.
In response to similar charges by hundreds of grassroots environmental,citizen and labour groups, Vice president Al Gore, Senator Max Baucus andother lawmakers with green credentials, accompanied by six leaders of thelargest national environmental groups who helped negotiate the environmentalside pact, held a briefing to praise Nafta's environmental safeguards.
Seemingly unfazed by Nafta's new show of life, the Citizens Trade Campaign,one of the umbrella opposition groups, called a press conference to 'debunk'the Clinton Administration claim Nafta would create 200,000 jobs in the nextfive years.
Notable by his absence from the fray has been Mr Richard Gephardt, the HouseMajority Leader, who is said to be close to moving from tentative tocommitted opposition.
He will join forces with Congressman David Bonior, themajority whip, and three of Mr Bonior's lieutenants, leaving the HouseSpeaker, Tom Foley, nearly alone on the defence, among the leadership.
'I do not think we have articulated well - the supporters of Nafta - thevery positive and energetic reasons that can be offered for supportingthis,' Mr Foley acknowledged.
Without Nafta, the US relationship with Mexico could 'deteriorate,' and'much of what people are worried about will happen, perhaps more speedilywithout Nafta than with it.
