Another A-10 crashed Dec. 8 in Tracy, Ariz.
Dan Howard, the Pentagon's chief spokesman, originally identifiedthe plane as an A-10 aircraft from the 81st Tactical Fighter Wing atRAF Bentwaters, England.
The Air Force later corrected thatstatement, saying the A-10 was assigned to the 10th Tactical FighterWing at RAF Alconbury.
Howard said the plane ``crashed at 9:53 a.m.
EST about four milessouth of St. Ives, or about 25 miles north of Cambridge.''
``The pilot ejected and his chute was sighted but we don't knowhis status,''
Howard said.
The aircraft was carrying ``dummy bombs and practice 33mmammunition,'' the spokesman said.
The A-10, a twin-engine jet designed to support troops by killingenemy tanks and other ground targets, is an older model planedesigned to be highly maneuverable at low speeds and low altitudeand to carry a lot of bombs and ammunition.
The Thunderbolt II is also one of the safest planes,statistically, in the Air Force inventory.
Nonetheless, today's crash comes just two weeks to the day afteranother A-10 slammed into the West German city of Remscheid, killingfive and injuring dozens.
That crash prompted the United States and its NATO allies toagree to suspend all A-10 flights over West Germany until Jan. 2.The suspension was ordered as German political parties and publicinterest groups increased their demands for an end to low-levelflight training in Germany.
On the same day as the crash in Remscheid, an A-10 crashed nearthe heart of the Tohono O'Odham Indian Reservation, about 80 mileswest of Tuscon, but the pilot ejected safely.
Howard refused today to discuss the possible cause of the crashin England, saying the Pentagon was still awaiting initial reportsfrom the scene and confirmation that the pilot survived.
The plane is no longer in production, but theAir Force has more than 700 of them in its inventory.
Statistically, the A-10 over time has been the safest fighter orattack plane currently in the inventory.
The aircraft has chalked upa major accident rate of less than 4 Class A mishaps per 100,000flying hours over its lifetime _ which now consists of more than1.75 million flight hours.
A Class A mishap is one in which there is either a fatality ordamage exceeding $500,000 to an aircraft.
The Air Force describes the A-10 as ``a simple, effective andsurvivable twin-engine jet aircraft that can be used against allground targets ...
