Introduction:
The government of the northernrepublic of Slovenia said Friday that Serbia, in the south andeast, is attempting to ``oust us from Yugoslavia.''
The statement from the Slovenian presidency followed Serbia'sdecision Tuesday to ban all political and economic contacts withSlovenia.
Liberal, prosperous Slovenia and the hard-line communistleadership of Serbia have been feuding for years.
But the Serbianaction Tuesday was the gravest threat to the unity of the Yugoslavfederation since the death of the nation's post-World War II leaderJosip
Broz Tito in 1980.
Earlier Friday 13 people were arrested when police dispersed acrowd of about 100 gathered for a pro-Serbian rally in Ljubljanathat had been prohibited by Slovenian authorities.
In its statement, Slovenia's collective presidency calledSerbia's action ``a flagrant violation of all constitutional, legaland civilized norms.''
It denounced the Serbian communist leadership, saying, ``We donot accept a comprehensive control of a single truth, of politicaluniformity, authoritarianism and intolerance, of ideologicmonolithism.''
Aleksandar Prlja, Serbia's secretary for foreign affairs, toldThe Associated Press that Slovenia's ``banning of the peacefulrally was deeply humiliating for the Serbian people.
Slovenian officials said the rally had been organized by Serbianpoliticians trying to oust the Slovenian leadership.
Economic decline has brought increased friction between therepublics with their different ethnic populations, and theSlovenian Serbian conflict also involves liberal vs. conservativecommunist leaders.
The Serbian news media on Friday accused Slovenia of``fascist-like'' behavior and called for the resignation ofYugoslav President Janez Drnovsek, a Slovene.
Delo, Ljubljana's major newspeper, said Friday's rally was ``anintegral part of a plan to alter by force the Yugoslav federation.
It called Serbia's imposition of an economic boycott a``declaration of war'' and said Slovenia would respond by ``openingitself to the world, introducing greater democracy and by holdingfree elections.
