Introduction:
The label "black conservative," now firmly affixed to Clarence Thomas' name,does not begin to tell the story of his life, an American story oftransformation.
Born barnyard poor in segregated Georgia, forsaken bytheir father, Thomas and his brother were reared by strict Bible-believinggrandparents who taught him to never say, "I can't."
Thomas, 43, creditseverything he has achieved to his grandparents.
In a hostile world, they taught himto rely on himself.
They shaped his views on individualism, race and society,views that guide him today.
"I was raised to survive under thetotalitarianism of segregation," Thomas wrote in a paper for the HeritageFoundation, a conservative public policy institute in Washington.
"We wereraised to survive in spite of the dark, oppressive cloud of governmentallysanctioned bigotry.
"Those who attempt to capture the daily counseling,oversight, common sense and vision of my grandparents in a governmentalprogram are engaging in sheer folly.
"The very beliefs that have broughtThomas to the steps of the U.S. Supreme Court make him suspect to blackpolitical activists, veterans of the struggle to make government accountablefor the wrongs done to blacks.
Yet as Washington Post journalist JuanWilliams has pointed out, Thomas is firmly grounded in the black intellectualtradition of Booker T. Washington, who advocated education, self-reliance andmutual support as the principal means of advancement.
Clarence Thomas wasborn June 23, 1948, in Pinpoint, Ga., a town in the marshes near Savannah.
Hismother, Leola, 18 at the time, lived in a house that had no plumbing.
Before Thomas' second birthday, his father moved to the North and left thefamily behind.
His mother remarried, and her second husband did not want thechildren of her first marriage.
Taken in by grandparentsAt age 7,Thomas was sent to live with his grandparents.
His grandfather, MyersAnderson, had little formal schooling.
"Hecould barely read and write -- read enough to read the Bible," Thomas said ina 1983 interview with the Washington Post. "
"He elaborated in the Heritage Foundation paper: "Of course, I thought mygrandparents were too rigid and their expectations were too high.
"But the world that lay beyond the confines of poverty and segregation was nottotally closed to Thomas.
His grandfather, a Catholic, enrolled him in anall-black school run by the church.
In 1967, he wasaccepted at the all-white Immaculate Conception Seminary in ConceptionJunction, Mo.
In the 1960s, he flirted with the politics of"black power" and considered himself a follower of Malcolm X.
He received his law degree from Yale University in1974.As a young lawyer, Thomas worked in the office of Missouri AttorneyGeneral John C. Danforth.
In 1982, after a year as assistant education secretary forcivil rights, Thomas was named by President Reagan to lead the EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission.
His tenure at the commission, whichinvestigates discrimination complaints, was controversial.
Abandoning support for hiring goals andtimetables, Thomas focused on resolving thousands of individual discriminationcomplaints.
When President Bushnominated Thomas to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, asteppingstone to the Supreme Court, a contentious confirmation process wasforecast.
But the hearings went smoothly, perhaps because Thomas was neveramong the Reagan administration's most outspoken critics of civil rights.
Hetook his seat on the appeals court in March 1990.Thomas, who lives insuburban Virginia, is married and has a son.
