military buildup in the Persian Gulf were among the 13 peoplekilled in the crash of U.S. military cargo plane in West Germany,military authorities said Wednesday.
The crash early Wednesday of the huge C-5A transport was thefirst major accident in the nearly 3-week-old, round-the-clockdeployment of U.S. personnel and equipment to the gulf.
``I don't want to speculate on the cause of this mishap,'' saidBrig.
``We don't haveany indication as to what the cause of the accident was.''
Four of the 17 people aboard the cargo plane were injured whenthe massive aircraft tumbled into a field early Wednesday aftertaking off from Ramstein Air Base, a stopover for many U.S.military flights bound for the gulf region.
The plane was bound for Frankfurt carrying medical supplies,food and aircraft maintenance equipment for U.S. troops sent toSaudi Arabia following the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, U.S.Air Force officials said.
Late Wednesday, the Air Force released the names of the victims.
Nine of those killed and one of those injured were reservistswith the 433rd Military Airlift Wing from Kelly Air Force Base inSan Antonio.
Listed as dead from the 433rd were Maj.
John M. Gordon, pilot;Maj.
Richard W. Chase, pilot; Sgt.
DwightPettit, both of McChord Air Base in Washington state; Capt.
The four were hospitalized and reported in satisfactorycondition, said Sgt.
The 433rd had not been called to active duty, but somereservists with the wing were voluntarily participating inOperation Desert Shield after arranging time off from theircivilian jobs.
The plane was from the 60th Military Airlift Squadron fromTravis Air Force Base in California and was en route to Rhein-MeinAir Base near Frankfurt, authorities said.
It left the Ramstein air base at about 12:30 a.m. and clippedthe tops of trees before crashing and breaking apart.
Twisted chunks of wings, landing gear, fuselage and other debriswere scattered over a wide area.
The weather was hazy but visibility was about one mile, saidSwope.
He said the aircraft was just over 20 years old, which he saidis not uncommon for the C-5.
The accident occurred about six miles from Miesau, where U.S.military authorities have been removing a cache of chemical weaponsunder an agreement with the West German government.
Ramstein, the largest U.S. Air Force base in Europe, is 90 mileswest of Frankfurt.
The C-5 is the largest transport plane in the Air Force fleetand costs about $148 million.
The crash Wednesday occurred a day after the second anniversaryof a collision during an air show at Ramstein which killed 70people.
