Introduction:LOS ANGELES --
A much-awaited report that paints adistressing picture of brutality and racism in the LosAngeles Police Department, and that calls for the resignationof its chief, could prompt changes in law enforcementnationwide.
The report was issued yesterday by a commission appointedby Mayor Tom Bradley and Police Chief Daryl Gates in the wakeof the videotaped beating March 3 of a black motorist, RodneyKing, by Los Angeles police.
The commission, headed by formerDeputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, found that asignificant number of officers use excessive force againstLos Angeles residents, a problem exacerbated by racism andbias in the department.
While the commission stopped short of blaming Chief Gatesfor these problems, it said that no chief should serve morethan two consecutive five-year terms, and that Mr. Gates,having served 13 years, should therefore turn in his badgefollowing a transition period.
But the chief, who has remained steadfast through repeatedcalls from community leaders for his ouster, said later: "Idon't expect to just run away" from the job.
Nearly one-quarter of 650 officers responding to acommission survey agreed that "racial bias on the part ofofficers toward minority citizens currently exists andcontributes to a negative interaction between police andcommunity," and in some cases "may lead to the use ofexcessive force," the report said.
A scant eight hours isdevoted to cultural awareness training at the Los AngelesPolice Academy, and many officers who train new recruits inthe field openly perpetuate the "siege mentality thatalienates patrol officers from the community," the commissionconcluded.
Officers commonly typed racial epithets to one another ontheir patrol car computer systems, such as: "Sounds likemonkey slapping time" and "I almost got me a Mexican lastnight."
Yet supervisors made no effort to monitor or controlthese messages, evidence of a "significant breakdown in thedepartment's management responsibility," the report found.
But the commissioncalled for a shift away from the force's paramilitaristic,us-against-them style, and said the department must embracethe "community-based" policing style that encourages officersto spend less time in their cars and more time interactingwith citizens in the communities they serve.
"This report will be a must-read for police chiefs aroundthe country," said Hubert Williams, executive director of thePolice Foundation, a Washington, D.C., law enforcementresearch group.
Williams likened the report to the Knapp Commission, a1970s blue-ribbon study that exposed widespread corruption inthe New York Police Department and led to significantimprovements there.
they arenot unique to Los Angeles," said John A. Arguelles, vicechairman of the 10-member Independent Commission on the LosAngeles Police Department.
Among the commission's recommendations are:--
A commission appointed by the mayor that oversees thedepartment should be reorganized and strengthened, and maderesponsible for handling citizen complaints.
-- A "major overhaul" of the police disciplinary systemand the process used by citizens to file complaints againstLAPD officers, especially in excessive force cases, isneeded.
The current system is "skewed against complainants,"by allowing officers' station-house colleagues to investigatecomplaints, perpetuating a "code of silence" among officers.--
A new community-based police force should focus on"service to the public and prevention of crime" as primarytasks rather than amassing arrest statistics.
However, the commission didn't address how Los Angeleswould pay for this major overhaul, though Mr. Christophersaid that "when you see the costs of settlementsaccelerating" in police misconduct lawsuits as they have inrecent years, "I'm not sure there will be a net cost"increase to implement the changes.
But with the city still sharply divided over the future ofChief Gates, and a general feeling that taxes are high enoughalready, it's questionable whether there will be a populargroundswell to immediately fund changes.
Of the six largest policedepartments in the U.S., the nation's second largest city hasthe fewest officers per thousand residents.
There are 8,450officers here for more than 3.5 million people; Chicago, witha smaller population, has 12,000.However,
Michael Yamaki, one of the city's five policecommissioners, believes that given the systemic problems inthe department that have come to light, "citizens now will bemore willing to fund police issues.
Even before the commission's report was issued, communitygroups that monitor the LAPD noted a decline in brutalitycomplaints.
The report "proves once and for all that theRodney King incident was not an aberration," said RamonaRipston, executive director of the American Civil LibertiesUnion of Southern California.
One officer who hadseven complaints against him that had been sustained -- aswell as numerous others that hadn't been -- was described inhis performance evaluation this way: "His contacts with thepublic are always professional and positive and his attitudewith the citizens is one of concern.
Minority officers complain that whites dominate managerialposts within the LAPD, possibly contributing to theseproblems.
More than 80% of the black, Hispanic and Asianpolice officers in the force are in the entry-level ranks,the report said.
But the most surprising part of the report was itsrecommendation that Chief Gates resign, after a transitionalperiod in which he would begin implementing the commission'sproposals.
Headded that he has worked on his own to accomplish some ofwhat the commission suggested, but has often been stymied bybudget cuts.
As for the recommendation that he step down, the embattledchief said he will wait until the voters sanction a move tolimit a police chief's tenure.
The mayor, whoappointed Gates but lacks the authority to fire him, haspreviously called for Chief Gates's resignation.
