Introduction:
For months, this county's politically astute Sheriff Sherman Block maintaineda low profile for himself and his department while city police were beinghammered after the videotaped beating of black motorist Rodney King.
Just last week, a federal judge hearing a civil rights suit issued anunusual order that employees follow department policy -- and the departmentappealed, winning a temporary delay of the order.
The spotlight that hadbeen trained on the police department and its 8,300 officers now has widenedto take in the equally large sheriff's department.
Block's measured responseto the criticism -- and the lack of a riveting videotape -- have spared himthe level of heat felt by Police Chief Daryl Gates.
But after years ofboasting that their methods were models in policing, both departments arefacing pressure to revolutionize their tactics to better fit thisfirst-of-its-kind metropolis.
"We are a multiracial, multicultural citymore than any other," said Ramona Ripston, head of the American CivilLiberties Union of Southern California.
"JosephMcNamara, retired chief of San Jose's department and now a fellow at StanfordUniversity's Hoover Institution, said he has been getting calls all summerfrom cities around the country about racism and brutality in
theirdepartments.
"Militarizing police is a definite trend in the past 10 years,and part of it is because of the Los Angeles
models.
"But some observerssay that, for a variety of political and social reasons, the possibility forsubstantive change on L.A. law's front lines is scant.
Low level ofinterest"There isn't the level of interest among voting people, peoplewith power, people with influence," ACLU spokesman Joe Hicks said.
"The poor minority communities that do care suffer "alack of organization that really can take advantage of the anger over thepolice and keep some momentum going that could potentially force reforms,"Hicks said.
The King beating led to an investigation of the policedepartment by an independent commission that found racism, brutality,inadequate discipline, mismanagement and a "siege mentality" pitting officersagainst the community.
The Christopher Commission's scathing report mademore than 100 recommendations, many of them aimed at moving away from thedepartment's "hard-nosed" approach and improving relations with residents.
At the street level, it suggested officers spend more time out of their patrolcars, work more with community groups and ease up on the common practice ofmaking suspects lie face down on the ground even when they pose no apparentthreat.
The city council is reviewing the recommendations, some of which --for instance, a term limit for the chief -- require voter approval.
Now,critics are calling for the same kind of independent investigation of thesheriff's department.
Like Gates before him, Block maintains hisdepartment is a good one with "a reputation as being one of the mostprogressive, one of the most professional, one of the finest law
enforcementagencies.
"The sheriff has said that his department continually re-examinesitself and launched several Christopher Commission recommendations before thecommission even existed -- but that it can't do everything.
'A last-resortmechanism'"Law enforcement, and I'm going beyond the sheriff's department,did not create the social conditions out there from which the violence isspringing," he said.
.
.
.
"Block pointed to social ills including high drop-out andilliteracy rates, "young people who are raising themselves," and a county jailsystem that is "perhaps the major houser of mentally ill people in our societyin this nation.
There are 950 known street gangs with morethan 99,300 members in the county, according to the sheriff's department.
Agreeing that law enforcement is not the answer to all of society's failures,critics say Block is missing the point.
"Police brutality (or) racism isnot a social problem, it's a law enforcement lack of leadership," the HooverInstitution's McNamara said.
.
.
.
The rhetoric of the LosAngeles police establishment through the years seems to have escalatedconflict, not lowered it.
'Window dressing' predictedOn the city side, they worry that theChristopher Commission recommendations will be diluted by the time the citycouncil and voters are finished with them.
Besides a new police chief, theACLU's Hicks predicted only "some window dressing and some moderate changesmade to training.
"On the county side, critics say Block's position as anelected official insulates him from the kind of independent review the citywas able to order for the police department.
And although he can be votedout, they say, the voters include great numbers of people in cities that hisdepartment doesn't patrol.
John Burton, an attorney specializing in policemisconduct cases, offers a grim view on the potential for change: "I thinkit's going to get worse, because of the general decay in social conditions andunemployment.
The government doesn't have anything to offer except policerepression, so that's what we get."
