Introduction:
Canadian Ben Johnson left the Olympicstoday ``in a complete state of shock,'' accused of cheating withdrugs in the world's fastest 100-meter dash and stripped of hisgold medal.
Many athletes accepted the accusation that Johnson used amuscle-building but dangerous and illegal anabolic steroid calledstanozolol as confirmation of what they said they know has beengoing on in track and field.
Red-eyed and visibly distraught, Johnson's sister, Clare Rodneyin suburban Toronto, refused to believe the accusation.
``If you could cut him into a million pieces and test him overagain, my brother is not on drugs,'' she said.
Neither a spiked sarsparilla in his track bag, as his coachsuggested, nor a switched sample at the lab could have accountedfor the levels of steroids found in the tests, officials said.
In a middle-of-the-night meeting with Olympic and Canadianofficials, family members, coach and manager, Johnson, 26,forfeited his most prized possession, the medal he'd had in hishands for only three days.
The world's fastest human also was automatically suspended frominternational competition for two years and banned from Canada'snational team for life.
``He appeared to be in a complete state of shock and notcomprehending the situation,'' said Canada's chief of mission,Carol Anne Letheren.
A few hours later, he fled to the airport and boarded a plane toNew York's Kennedy International Airport.
Once there, he made hisway through a crush of reporters without comment as some spectatorsapplauded.
``This is a blow for the Olympic Games and the Olympicmovement,'' said International Olympic Committee President JuanAntonio Samaranch.
In Canada, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said the scandal was a``personal tragedy for Ben and his family.
James Worrall, a Canadian member of the IOC, said Johnson ``hasbeen killed'' as an athlete.
He said the sprinter's once-favoredstatus as a hero to many sports fans in Canada, his native Jamaica,and around the world now will be tarnished.
Johnson's name will go down in Olympic history with otherathletes who lost their gold medals, such as decathlete Jim Thorpein 1912 because he played semi-pro baseball and swimmer Rick DeMontin 1972 because he took an asthma medicine.
``I feel sorry forBen and for the Canadian people,'' he said today.
He said he did not want ``to fuel this controversy'' bycommenting further.
After Saturday's race, though, Lewis had said he couldn'tunderstand how Johnson could run as fast as he did after lookingtired in qualifying heats.
Dr. Robert Dugal, a Canadian member of the IOC medicalcommission, called stanozolol ``one of the most dangerous anabolicsteroids.
It has the effect of leading to a number of disturbancesof the liver, including cancer.
