Introduction:
A colossal tunneling machineis boring beneath the English Channel from the white cliffs ofDover, pursuing a dream born in Napoleon's time that is coming trueat last.
The 31-mile tunnel, 24 miles of it underwater, will cut theLondon-Paris journey from six hours to three, as fast as ascheduled airline.
It will enable freight to travel on one train instead of beingshifted to trucks for a cross-channel ferry trip subject to weatherand shipping strikes.
Tunneling speed at the Dover end is less than 15 feet an hourand the machine boring from the geologically more complex Frenchend moves even slower, which is why the tunnel will not open until1993.
For continental Europeans, accustomed to long-distance railtravel, the tunnel is but a small spur on a vast network stretchingto Moscow and beyond.
For the British, the change wrought by what many call the``chunnel'' will be enormous.
``People still question whether the tunnel will be complete inMay 1993 and that's ridiculous,'' says Kathy Watson, co-author of abook on the project.
``They're still arguing about whether it willintroduce rabies into this country, or let in terrorists.''
``They discuss it in terms of their being an island race, with achannel that has kept out invaders,'' she said in an interview.
State-owned British Rail will not commit itself to building ahigh-speed link from London to the tunnel in time to make thethree-hour journey a reality in 1993.
Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium that will own thetunnel, is urging British Rail to speed its plans.
Critics say thetangle of commuter lines in southeast England, so obsolete thattrains can be delayed by a sudden fall of autumn leaves, will delaytunnel traffic.
Criticssay this will waste time and Britain should follow the continentalpractice of handling such matters on the train during the journey.
British stations, bridges and tunnels are not built for the tallloads commonly carried across the channel.
Britain's entry into the European Economic Community engendereda spirit of unity and the digging began again in 1974, but twoyears later a new British government shelved the project.
With trade barriers among the 12 EEC countries set to fall in1992, Colin Kirkland, technical director of Eurotunnel's on theBritish side, says the tunnel will be completed this time.
He says the entire cost of 5.2 billion pound ($8.8 billion)project is privately financed and cancellation would cost thegovernments ``enormous penalties'' to shareholders.
Also, the governments signed a tunnel treaty in February 1986and both would have to agree to cancellation.
``There's no way that politicians will cancel this project,''Kirkland said in an interview.
Money's power to move the tunnel forward was demonstrated inAugust, when drilling fell behind schedule.
Eurotunnel ordered a management shakeup and threatenedTrans-Manche Link, the consortium of 10 British and Frenchengineering companies building the tunnel, with penalties of $25million if the diggers did not pass the three-mile mark by Nov. 1.
The tunnel, 80-130 feet below the seabed, was 2 miles into thechannel from this end Oct. 9, the most recent measurementavailable, and the French had progressed about 1,300 feet.
At its peak, the project will employ about 11,000 workers and 11tunneling machines.
With a laser beam to keep the driver on course, the700-foot-long behemoth creeps along, pressing curved slabs ofScottish granite and pulverized ash into the newly exposed tunnelwall.
In an emergency like flooding, the cylindrical head of themachine can expand to become a cork, blocking off the water andspraying concrete into the cavity to seal the leak.
Because the machines are too large to be removed, when thedigging is complete they will be rolled aside and walled in.
The tunnels are to be completed in 1991, then the railroadtracks will be laid.
Eurotunnel will run shuttle trains once everythree minutes at peak times between terminals near Folkestone andCalais, and British Rail and the Frenh state railroad will operatetrains from London and Paris.
Cars and trucks will drive onto the shuttle trains and be ableto stay in their vehicles or stroll about during the 35-minutetunnel passage.
