Introduction:
At least four moderate earthquakes rattledparts of the world, but there was nary a tremor Monday along theNew Madrid Fault, where a scientist said a earthquake was likely tooccur.
``This is just a normal day,'' said Waverly Person, chief of theU.S.
Along the New Madrid Fault, some schools were canceled andresidents purchased earthquake emergency kits and others left town,just in case climatologist Iben Browning was right.
Browning said there was a 50-50 chance for a major earthquakeearly this week along the fault, which stretches from Marked Tree,Ark., northeast through New Marid, Mo., to Cairo, Ill.
He believestidal forces can trigger earthquakes, a theory most scientistsreject.
``There's just no way to predict an earthquake precisely,'' saidPerson, who has been with the U.S. Geological Survey for more than25 years.
The center received more than 50 calls about the New Madridforecast Monday morning and hundreds last week, said Person, whobegan doing interviews for radio and television stations just aftermidnight.
As Person talked, 24 seismographs etched out activity recordedby monitoring equipment in different parts of the United States,ranging from Alaska to Tennessee.
A needle jumped a few inches across the seismograph connected tomonitoring equipment in Tonopah, Nev.
Person scanned the chart andcalled to a colleague, ``It may be a nuclear test.
With a measured eye, he estimated the quake was magnitude 2.5 to3.0 on the Richter scale.
Quick calculations showed the quake wasmagnitude 3.5, centered about 30 miles southwest of Ely, Nev.
Three were in the South Pacific, a 5.9-magnitude shakernear New Caledonia, and quakes of 5.1 and 5.0 in the area of Tonga.
About 800 quakes between magnitudes 5.0 and 5.9 are recorded eachyear, said USGS spokesman Don Finley in Washington.
An earthquake of 3.5 on the Richter scale can cause slightdamage in the local area, 4 moderate damage, 5 considerable damage,6 severe damage.
A 7 reading is a ``major'' earthquake, capable ofwidespread heavy damage; 8 is a ``great'' quake, capable oftremendous damage.
In 1989, the earthquake center recorded 14,604 earthquakes, witha magnitude 1 or higher, Person said.
This fall, there have been two in the New Madrid Fault area,magnitude 4.6 on Sept. 26 and magnitude 3.5 on Nov. 9, which ``isnot unusual,'' he said.
Although earthquakes can be tracked historically, forecastingthem is difficult, if not impossible, Person said.
Other quakes occur in a swarm over a periodof time, he said.
One woman called daily, alerting Person that an earthquake wasabout to occur, based on the number of birds that crossed herwindshield as she drove down the street.
