Introduction:   Britain and France were linked beneath theEnglish Channel on Tuesday when workers used a two-inch probe toconnect two halves of a 31-mile undersea rail tunnel, officialsreported.
Management sources at TransManche Link, the constructionconsortium building the ``Chunnel'' - the Channel Tunnel
-confirmed the historic linkup occurred about 8:25 p.m. when Britishworkers sent the probe through to French colleagues.
The linkup fulfills a dream by Napoleon in 1802, who thought hecould defeat the English by connecting Britain to Europe with aland passage.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' said a construction unionofficial.
Eight workers suffered injuries, two seriously, about 90 minuteslater when a tractor towing supplies rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
The basic goal of the Channel Tunnel project is to enablepassengers to travel between London and Paris in about three hours.
That time is comparable to flying, if transport to and fromairports is included, and is half the time of a car-ferry journey.
The conservative Daily Express newspaper noted in its Wednesdayeditions that Britons would theoretically be able to walk to Francefor the first time since the last Ice Age.
The cost of the project has soared from an initial estimate of$9.4 billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion forunforeseen cost overruns.
The threading of the probes through 100 yards of chalk under theEnglish Channel marks a major turning point in three years ofdrilling on the world's costliest tunnel.
The meeting point was just over 13{ miles southeast ofShakespeare Cliff, the British terminus near the town of Dover, and10 miles northwest of the French town of Sangatte, near Calais.
The tunnel starts a few miles inland on each side, accountingfor its total length of 31 miles.
French workers reaching the tiny hole telephoned their Britishcounterparts and relayed the news to TransManche officials.
It's the first time we have airpassing between the two tunnels,'' said Gordon Crighton, tunnelengineering manager.
``We see it as just another exercise, but I'm sure there will bea lot of parties going on,'' he said.
Another day will be needed to be certain, technicianssaid, but they called the line-up ``exceptional,'' considering themassive boring machines are drilling holes about three storieshigh.
The other will drill its own grave and be buried in cementbecause French officials said it will be too costly to extricateit.
A work slowdown since last week by militant tunnelers
demandingmore pay on the French side appeared likely Monday to stall thelinkup until the weekend or beyond.
The Chunnel actually consists of three tunnels - two for railwaytrains and a smaller maintenance tunnel between them.
Taking into account all the tunnels, 80 percent of the drillinghas been completed by giant, Japanese-built boring machines workingfrom Calais and Folkstone, England.
Tuesday's linkup in the service tunnel is described by theFrench as a ``mouse ole'' - a bore only two inches in diameter.
President Francois Mitterrand and Mrs. Thatcher are expected tomeet each other in the tunnel Jan. 26, after the digging for muchof the tunnel is finished.
Eurotunnel PLC, the world's largest engineering project,announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreement with its banks on$3.5
billion in new credit.
The Chunnel's scheduled debut in mid-1993 would come six monthsafter the 12-nation European Community formally drops remainingtrade barriers, becoming a unified marketplace of 320 millionconsumers.
Officials estimate the tunnel may carry 28 million passengers inthe first year of operation, although Eurotunnel doesn't expect aprofit until the end of the century.
A study released last Friday in Paris by transportation expertssaid the tunnel's completion will aggravate traffic congestion in awide area of continental Europe.
Some Britons have worries of a different sort, fearing an influxof ills from the continent ranging from terrorism to rabid animals.
Since construction began in late 1987, there have been sevendeaths on the British side and two on the French.
