Introduction:TO MOST PEOPLE, marathons and vacations are mutually exclusive.
Vacation,according to Webster, means "freedom from any activity; rest; respite.
"Amarathon, says the same source, is "a footrace of 26 miles, 385 yards, runover an open course."
And to help these folks along, companies arrange tours for marathonvacations.
Bangkok in November, London in April and Stockholm inMay.
said Thorn Gilligan, president of MarathonTours in Boston.
"Gilligan took5,500 people last year on 20 tours to countries from Bermuda to Moscow.
Inaddition to air fare and hotel, runners are guaranteed spots in restrictedentry races such as the London Marathon.
London, the most popular European city to visit, holds the world's largestmarathon (April 12 next year).
Berlin's race (Sept. 27, 1992) has grown withthe demise of the wall.
"Most marathons take you through cities, so you geta chance to see things you'd never see on a sightseeing bus," said Fred Lebow,president of the New York Roadrunner's Club and director of the New YorkMarathon.
Lebow has run in 32 marathons, including London, Paris, Rome,Stockholm, Iceland, Seoul and Vienna.
"The most exciting thing is the startof the race," he said.
"The cities aredifferent, but most marathons include a carbo-loading pasta party the nightbefore, medical exams, a post-race celebration, commemorative T-shirts andawards to finishers.
Entry fees vary; Brussels is $16, Venice $40.MarathonTours includes the entry price in the package.
Going to Bermuda, for example,costs approximately $900 from San Francisco.
The price includes round-trip airfare, four days and three nights at the Grotto Bay Beach hotel (per person,based on double occupancy), full breakfasts and dinners, a welcome cocktailparty and post-race parties and discounts.
England has similarorganizations: Sports Tours International and Keith Prowse, a company thatspecializes in British theater, sports and concert tours.
But it isn'tnecessary to run 26.2 miles to go on a running vacation, especially if it's afamily trip.
Some marathons, like Portland's, include additional races: afive-mile run, a five-mile walk and a kids run.
Running coach Pat Savage and Hal Higdon, a senior writer forRunner's World, are taking a group to Ireland in June.
The eight-day trip willleave from Chicago and will include sightseeing, guided runs and a fun runfrom Malahide Castle to Swords.
"On a running vacation you plan somethingaround running everyday," Higdon said.
Running 26 miles just to see a city definitely isn'tfor everyone, but at the very least, it's a way to kill two birds with onestone.
In the recent Chicago Marathon, a German man ran with a camera,snapping photos every few miles.
IF YOU'RE INTERESTEDIf you're interestedin combining a vacation and marathon, here are some firms to contact:;   Marathon Tours, 108 Main St., Charlestown, Mass.
(617) 242-7845.Roadrunner Tours, 2815 Lake Shore Dr., Michigan City, Ind.
(219)879-0133.Keith Prowse, based in England.
(8OO)
6MY-TOUR.Sports Tours International, 91 Walkdon Rd., Walkdon, Worslay, Manchester M285DQ, United Kingdom.
