Introduction:
In his first race after a two-year suspension for drug use, Ben Johnson provedFriday night that he can run fast even without the anabolic steroid thatcaused his expulsion from the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea.
But the29-year-old Canadian, whose indoor and outdoor world records were washed awayby admissions that he used performance-enhancing substances for seven years,managed only to finish second in the 50-meter dash of the Hamilton SpectatorGames.
His time of 5.77 seconds was eclipsed by the 5.75-second time of DaronCouncil, a former narcotics officer who now works in crime prevention for theAlachua County, Fla., sheriff's department.
The brief race produced arecord crowd of 17,050 and drew nearly 500 journalists from 14 countries inNorth America, Europe and Asia.
They were attracted by the return ofJohnson, whose day of infamy, Sept. 24, 1988, has assured him a millennium offame.
He would merely have been a gold medalist if a positive test at the1988 Olympics had not turned him into the most vilified champion in thehistory of the Games.
It also led to the two-year suspension from the sportthat made an epic event of Johnson's race Friday.
"I got caught in the blocks," Johnson said.
By then, thestart had been delayed eight minutes by two false starts and a problem withthe board track.
"There was a lot of pressure on me because itwas my first race back, and it was hard to concentrate on the race with theway the fans were yelling for me.
His time was far from the 5.55 he ran in1987 that is still listed as the fastest ever at 50 meters.
"I'm in verygood shape, but I'm not in racing shape," Johnson said as he was escorted todrug testing, for which he was randomly selected.
It was adifferent-looking Johnson than the one who had bolted to apparent victory inthe Olympics.
This Johnson wasn't as bulky in the upper body, nor was hisface as puffy.
Despite Johnson's trimness, he said he weighed the same --174 pounds -- and was lifting the same amount of weight -- bench-pressing 365pounds -- as before his two-year suspension for testing positive for aperformance-enhancing steroid.
"People are saying I'm smaller," Johnsonsaid before the race. "
"When he was introduced before the race, Johnson was given athunderous standing ovation.
When the race ended, the fans thought he had wonand broke into loud cheering.
