Introduction:
THE MAN President Bill Clinton has chosen to head the task force to help gethis free trade pact with Canada and Mexico ratified may lack experience ininternational trade arenas.
William Daley is younger brother and chief adviser to Chicago's mayorRichard M Daley and offspring of the legendary Democratic machine 'Boss',the late Richard J Daley.
Unlike his hot-tempered and very public brother,45-year-old Bill Daley is a smooth-talking behind-the-scenes operator withimportant connections in Washington and long-standing ties with organisedlabour.
Mr Daley accepted the Nafta position after being passed over for a cabinetposition and turning down an offer to be Mr Clinton's chief negotiator atthe General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva.
He chaired Mr Clinton's election campaign in Illinois, where he delivered 48per cent of the vote to Clinton, above the national average, and continuesas a tangible supporter.
Most recently, he arranged a posh Chicago dinnerfor the president that raised Dollars 1m (Pounds 670,000).However, Mr Daley's appointment to chair the White House's task force on theNorth America Free Trade Agreement is not a cosy political payoff.
Recentpolls show that as many as two-thirds of the American people do not supportNafta, and grassroots opposition fuelled by labour groups is growing.
Mr Clinton himself reserved his support for the deal, negotiated underGeorge Bush's administration, until side agreements dealing withenvironmental and labour issues were reached last month.
With the agreement fated to unravel if it is not ratified byJanuary 1, the battle for congressional support will be fierce, fast, andvisible.
Mr Daley was chosen for the job, Chicago observers say, because he hasproven he can sway votes and is willing to take the risk of losing acontroversial battle. '
Clinton needssomeone with political sense to move this thing through Congress, and Daleyhas the connections,' says a fellow Washington lobbyist.
Mr Daley's talents have beensummoned, insiders say, to convince moderate Democrats to back theagreement.
Clintonally and fellow Chicago Democrat, Mr Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the Houseways and means committee, is expected to deliver the 20 Democrats on hiscommittee.
By rough count, Mr Daley will have to marshall 73 votes from Democraticrepresentatives of states standing to gain the most from the agreement:those along the border with Mexico and those with big agricultural, consumerproduct, or manufacturing export interests.
His Chicago-style back-room muscle will be an invisible counterweight to thepublic tactics of Nafta's most prominent opponent, Mr Ross Perot.
Mr Perot'spopulist anti-Nafta campaign touts the 'giant sucking sound' that will beheard as Nafta-loosened jobs flow south of the Texas border.
Mr Clinton may be banking on Mr Daley's union ties to help the Nafta effort.
However, Mr Daley, by pushing Nafta, runs the risk of alienating his unionsupporters.
Mr Jim Jontz, former congressman from Indiana and director ofthe anti-Nafta Citizen's Trade Campaign, said: 'I don't know why Bill Daleywould want to be in a position like that.
