Introduction:   Mexico, where sun worship has passed fromancient civilizations to modern beachgoers, is gearing up early forthe day next year when the sun will be blotted out.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has appointed aCabinet-level commission to prepare for what astronomers bill as``the slar eclipse of the century'' on July 11.
Posters have beenplaced in Mexico City subways promoting the event, and resortsalong the eclipse's path are scrambling to accommodate the expectedrush of tourists.
``It's the most important eclipse in history,'' says Miguel GilGuzman, secretary-general of the Mexican Astronomical Society.
This one will cut a swath across one of the most populousregions of the globe, turning day to night for an estimated 50million residents in 14 of Mexico's 31 states.
The 165-mile-wide path will go dark for almost seven minutes,the maximum length for a total solar eclipse.
On July 11, the moon will pass between the planet and the sun,abruptly swallowing midday's light, except for a weird glow on thehorizon.
But the special government commission, Eclipse 1991, is bankingon the clouds to roll in the country's financial favor.
The commission bills the northwestern state of Baja CaliforniaSur as the best place to watch because the state has an average of300 cloudless days a year.
Most hotels along the eclipse route are full for July 11.Tourism officials are seeking private homes and campgrounds,schools and auditoriums to house the influx.
Baja
California Sur's tourist facilities can only handle 120,000visitors, and 90 percent of that capacity is booked, tourismdirector Rodolfo Palacios says.
Some 13,500 amateur and professional astronomers from the UnitedStates, Japan, Soviet Union, China, Canada, England, France andGermany have confirmed reservations.
The Pacific coast region of Nayarit is bracing for about 1million visitors, about double the population.
Cuernavaca, 35 miles south of Mexico City, is hosting ageophysicists' congress during the week of the eclipse.
At least one expedition plans to view the show from the17,887-foot Popocapetl volcano, the country's second-highest peak.
The moon is 400 timessmaller than the sun, but because it is 400 times closer to theearth, the smaller body appears to cover the larger one.
Rosy rays of light will shoot out around the moon's edges,forming what astronomers call a corona, or crown.
The National University is developing six half-hourdocumentaries on eclipses and 10 TV spots on the dangers of lookingat the sun, astronomy professor Jesus Galindo says.
Since September, the university newspaper has been publishinginstallments of a book called ``Eclipse'' that will be translatedinto Indian languages.
The government plans to supervise the production of speciallenses for viewing an eclipse.
