Introduction:US CITIES along the Gulf of Mexico from Alabama to eastern Texas were onstorm watch last night as Hurricane Andrew headed west after sweeping acrosssouthern Florida, causing at least eight deaths and severe property damage.
In the Bahamas, governmentspokesman Mr Jimmy Curry said four deaths had been reported on outlyingeastern islands.
Mr Justin Balcombe, of UK-based insurance adjuster Balcombe Group, saidtotal losses could exceed Dollars 15bn if business interruption claims weretaken into account.
That compares with the Dollars 4bn-Dollars 6n (Pounds2.1bn-Pounds 3.1bn) of insurance industry losses caused by the last big UShurricane, Hugo, which hit South Carolina in 1989.The brunt of the losses are likely to be concentrated among US insurers,industry analysts said yesterday.
Mr George Lloyd-Roberts, chairman of Lloyd's Underwriters' Non-MarineAssociation, said that, unless damage claims exceeded Pounds 3bn, theLloyd's insurance market would feel little impact.
Because the reinsuranceof reinsurance risk  - known as the retrocession market  - has shrunkconsiderably in recent years, US insurers have placed far fewer of theirrisks through Lloyd's.
Mr Roger Hill, insurance analyst at Warburg Securities, said he estimatedthat mainline UK insurers faced no more than Pounds 75m in damage claims sofar.
The real question, headded, is the level of reinsurance available to the UK underwriters.
Among other UK insurers, Mr Hill estimated that General Accident may facelosses of up to Pounds 30m, while Guardian Royal Exchange faced Pounds 5mand Sun Alliance and Commercial Union Pounds 10m each.
However, Hurricane Andrew gathered fresh strength as it moved across theGulf of Mexico and there was concern last night that it might head towardsNew Orleans, which is especially low lying and could suffer severe flooddamage.
Scientists said the storm could make landfall anywhere between the Alabamaport of Mobile and the Louisiana-Texas border, probably tomorrow night orearly Thursday.
A substantial part of America's oil refining industry is concentrated on theGulf coast, in Louisiana and Texas, and officials there were reviewingemergency plans to curtail or shut down plant operations.
Andrew, the first Caribbean hurricane of the season, hit the eastern coastof Florida early yesterday, gusting up to 165mph.
It ripped roofs offhouses, smashed cars and trucks, snapped power lines and uprooted treesbefore heading out over the Gulf.
The Florida Power andLight company said that about 1.2m of its customers, or 32 per cent, werewithout power.
Some of the strongest winds were in the affluent suburb of Coral Gables,just south of Miami, where the National Hurricane Center is located.
