Introduction:
This nation's volatile election was postponed today as the country was plungedinto shock and turmoil after Tuesday's assassination of former Prime MinisterRajiv Gandhi.
Gandhi, 46, a member of a family dynasty that led India forthree generations, died after a powerful bomb detonated near a campaignplatform in Sriperumbudur, about 30 miles from Madras, the capital of TamilNadu.
India's military and paramilitary forces were put on "red alert" as gangstook to the streets of New Delhi and other cities, looking for scapegoats.
Seshan, early this morning postponedthe remaining two phases of the national parliamentary elections until nextmonth.
The first phase of the elections took place Monday, but voting for theremaining 60 percent of the 537 seats at stake will be June 12 and 15 insteadof Thursday and Sunday.
Eyewitnesses at the assassination scene saidGandhi's body was ripped apart and decapitated by the force of the explosion.
At least 14 other people, including a senior police officer, died in theblast.
A Congress Party spokesman said the bomb washidden in a bouquet of flowers offered to Gandhi as he approached the dais forhis speech.
There was no immediate indication who was responsible forthe bomb, but speculation centered on Tamil separatists seeking an independentstate in nearby Sri Lanka.
"When you look at hiscontribution to international order and you think of his decency, it's atragedy," Bush said in Washington.
End of dynastyGandhi's death marksthe likely end of the political dynasty that has dominated Indian politicssince independence in 1947.
Analysts here said there is no obvious successorto him as leader of the Congress Party, which was founded by his grandfather,Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, and later dominated by hismother, Indira Gandhi, who was prime minister when she was assassinated in1984.This morning, Gandhi's body was flown to a stunned New Delhi.
His widow, Sonia, sobbed and hugged the couple's daughter Priyanka as thewomen stepped down from the air force Boeing 737 that had flown them to Madrasto bring Gandhi's body home.
Even before Gandhi's death, more than 150people had died this week in violence connected to the election.
After theassassination, violent mobs rampaged along roads leading to Madras on Tuesdaynight, smashing vehicles and other property, according to Indian newsagencies.
Government officials in New Delhi ordered all governmentoffices, schools and colleges shut amid widespread fears that theassassination would touch off a wave of violence in a country that has endureda spate of riots during the past year, mainly over religious and casteconflicts.
Outside Gandhi's house in New Delhi on Tuesday night, hundredsof angry Congress Party workers chanted slogans against the CIA, accusing theU.S.
People broke into the house of Gandhi's neighbor, former Labor Minister RamVilas Paswan, and set furniture ablaze, police said.
Paswan, a member of the Janata Dal party, which defeated Gandhi's CongressParty in the 1989 general elections, was not home at the time.
Someshocked Indian political leaders told reporters they feared Rajiv Gandhi'sassassination augured the death of India's four-decades-old democracy.
Butothers, including leaders of the main rival to the Congress Party in thiselection, the Hindu revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party, denounced the killingand urged the country to remain calm in its aftermath.
J.B. Patnaik, a powerful Congress politician inthe eastern state of Orissa, said: "I don't know what is going to happen now,how democracy will survive.
"At the site of the bomb blast in Tamil Nadu,there was no immediate evidence as to who was responsible.
Gandhi and hisCongress Party have many enemies on the subcontinent, including violentseparatists in Kashmir and Punjab, leftist revolutionaries and rightist Hindumilitants.
Guerrillas suspectedMost of the early speculation, however,focused on Gandhi's most hardened opponents in Tamil Nadu, the LiberationTigers of Tamil Eelam, a disciplined and violent guerrilla force that has usedTamil Nadu as a base in its campaign to win a separate state in Sri Lanka, theisland nation just off India's southeastern coast.
The Tamil Tigers haveassassinated dozens of political enemies in Sri Lanka and southern India,often using powerful plastic explosives set off by remote control.
Earlierthis year, the state government of Tamil Nadu was dismissed and central ruleimposed after allegations that local politicians were providing aid andprotection to the Tamil Tigers.
Gandhi, whose Congress Party provided the mainbacking to the New Delhi government at the time, was widely seen as beingbehind the dismissal, which angered the Tamil Tigers and their supporters insouthern India.
During the current election, the Congress Party faced abrisk challenge from a leftist coalition led by former Prime Minister V.P.Singh, who denounced what he called Congress's "culture of corruption" andadvocated divisive job set-asides for India's lower castes and religiousminorities.
An even tougher test for the Congress -- and the centristideology that has held India together for four decades -- has been mounted byHindu ultranationalists from the Bharatiya Janata Party, who denounced Gandhifor allegedly pandering to India's Muslim minority and directing too manygovernment resources to religious and caste minorities in an effort to winvotes.
Election in India: turmoil and tragedyThe Congress Party, whichhas dominated Indian politics since independence in 1947, is being challengedby a center-left coalition that wants to break down the caste system and aright-wing party that seeks a more openly Hindu, less secular India.
The four varna and their colors, in order of descent:;    Brahmins: Religious leaders and scholars; whiteKshatriyas: Rulers,nobles, warriors; redVaisyas: Banking and business; yellow;   Sudras: Artisans, laborers and servants; blackBeneath thishierarchy are the Panchamas, also know as outcastes or untouchables, whoperform such tasks as tanning and leather working.
Political parties;   Congress Party: Centrist party, led India's independence struggle againstBritish colonial rule.
Socialist Janata Dal:
The party was formed in November with Congress Partybacking by current prime minister Chandra Shekhar, who heads interimgovernment.
; ...India's politicalbloodlines;    Rajiv Gandhi;    1944-1991Became prime minister in 1984after assassination of Indira Gandhi.
;
...Sanjay Gandhi;    1946-1980Younger son of IndiraGandhi, served as her chief political adviser in the '70s, considered herpolitical heir-apparent until his death in a plane crash.
;    ...Jawaharlal Nehru;    1889
-1964India's first prime minister, 1947-1964.Associate of Mohandas Gandhi.
;    ...
Mohandas K. Gandhi;    1869-1948Leader ofnationalist movement, pioneered nonviolent resistance against British rule.
;
...Sources: Dictionary of World Religions, World Book Encyclopedia, WorldFactbook 1990, Encyclopedia Brittanica, Current Biography, World Almanac 1991,New York Times, Associated Press; .....
Reported by Maggie Hirsch, graphic byJenny Anderson -- Mercury News  
