The great storms have madefictional plots of B movies and unmade real dreams of people who would implantcivilization in an environment that could be swallowed up by nature in amoment.
Nine years earlier, a "BigOne" had stopped Miami's first real-estate boom in its tracks, pushingfloodwaters inland to the new jai alai fronton near where Miami InternationalAirport sits today.
The last to hitMiami was Cleo, a small one, in 1964, and the intervening period of calmdefies all odds.
Hurricane seasonofficially extends from June 1 through Nov. 30, and scientists at the NationalHurricane Center, tucked away on the sixth floor of a nondescript officebuilding in this Miami suburb, are perking up after another winter lull.
From now until the end of the season, the six hurricane specialists willmonitor weather computers 24 hours a day.
In this part of the world,technology has made obsolete such disasters as the unnamed hurricane thatsurprised Galveston, Texas, in 1900, killing 6,000 people.
The hurricanespecialists use the nation's only working geostationary weather satellite tofollow developing storms.
When a disturbance becomes threatening, a speciallyequipped plane is sent into the storm's heart to measure barometric pressure,wind speed and temperature.
One of the specialists, Lixion Avila, hasbegun counting tropical waves that form off the coast of Africa
every few daysduring hurricane season.
About 20 of them intensify into stronger disturbances, ranging fromtropical depressions, with wind speeds to 38 mph; to tropical storms, withwinds from 39 to 73 mph; to hurricanes, with winds exceeding 74 mph.
One such year was 1935-- only six hurricanes formed, but one was the strongest to hit the continent.
More than 800 workers, brought down to build the Overseas Highway through theFlorida Keys, were killed when 200 mph winds knocked their evacuation trainoff the tracks.
NO MATTER what long-range forecasters say, scientists atthe Hurricane Center know that the laws of probability are closing in onMiami.
Miami has grown immensely since the last major storm and is greatlyoverdue, they said.
"Historically, south Florida has had more hurricanesthan any other site," said Jerry Jarrell, a hurricane specialist eyeingMiami's 27-year hiatus nervously.
"At the center, scientistsbuilt a computer model to calculate what would happen if the 1926 hurricanewere to hit Miami today.
That storm was almost exactly the strength ofHurricane Hugo, which hit in South Carolina with 135 mph winds in September1989.
"It would be a totally different storyhere," said Max Mayfield, who collected photos from the 1926 storm toillustrate the model.
"A worst-case storm,with winds topping 150 mph, would put 5 feet of water in Joe's Stone Crabsrestaurant, a Miami Beach landmark, and 9 feet of water on Biscayne Boulevardin downtown Miami.
Hurricanes changedirection and intensify in a matter of hours and, in 24 hours, the specialistssaid, they could miscalculate one's track by 100 miles.
This, and the numberof years since the last major storm hit, has spawned a certain complacencyamong residents that the specialists find disturbing.
Mayfield went toMiami Beach recently to discuss his model with officials there, and what heheard worried him.
"The fire department did a survey, and 90 percent ofthe people they talked to said they wouldn't evacuate for a hurricane,"Mayfield said.
