Introduction:   John Hatch, founder of the non-profit Foundationfor International Community Assistance, promotes village banking toencourage private enterprise in the Third World.
He had decided he could not comply with requirements of aconsulting job he had accepted from the Agency for InternationalDevelopment, and he was scrambling to come up with a suitablesubstitute.
``And on my second double bourbon at 35,000 feet up flying overthe Andes, I have to say it was like this thought just rolledthrough my body,'' Hatch recalls.
``I had my calculator out and Iwas sketching this thing
and I was doing numbers, and I arrived inLa Paz with a full-blown concept.''
What he had stumbled upon was village banking, a system ofinvestment using small revolving loans to poor women to financetheir private enterprise, allowing them to create savings whilepaying interest and qualifying for bigger loans.
The series of loans, starting at $50, is renewable over threeyears to a ceiling of $300, allowing recipients to reach a level atwhich they can qualify for commercial credit.
What Hatch envisioned on that plane five years ago hastranslated into 400 village banks in nine countries with more than35,000 members.
The concept is similar to the one behind the Grameen Bank ofBangladesh: channeling money to the impoverished, principallymothers, without the demands of commercial banks for collateral, sothey can improve their families' lives.
Hatch, a one-time Peace Corps volunteer with a doctorate ineconomic development, is founder and president of the non-profitFoundation for International Community Assistance, which recentlymoved its headquarters from Tucson to Alexandria, Va.
He says its impetus was, and remains, the thousands of childrenworldwide who die daily because of starvation, what he calls thesacrifice of ``probably our most precious resource.''
There is ``almost a 100 percent guarantee'' that increasedincome for women will go into improvements in their children'swelfare, Hatch says.
``We teach severely poor mothers how to create their ownself-managed bank, which provides them with self-employment loans,provides them with savings incentives and provides them with asupport group of mothers like themselves, so that they are allattacking change at the same time.''
Lawrence Yanovitch, small enterprise development programcoordinator for Catholic Relief Services in Baltimore, Md.,
says,``John Hatch is close to the voice of the poor.
Though he's come upwith some sophisticated economic tools, he's kept thehumanitarianism.''
Catholic Relief Services entered a five-year, $1 million jointventure a year ago with the U.S. Agency for InternationalDevelopment and the foundation to create 40 village banks inThailand.
They targeted microenterprise development through smallentrepreneurs, vendors, village market women, who in somedeveloping countries comprise up to 50 percent of the employment.
Beryl Rupp, a Rotary Club official in Phoenix, says the bankmembers buy necessities with their profits or savings: a chair tosit on, pots to cook in, blankets, better food.
The women, when asked, speak of the greatest benefit in terms ofwhat Hatch calls ``empowerment perceptions.''
Their vehicle for improvement is the village bank, eachcomprised of 30 to 50 women who, through loans starting at $50, canearn enough to provide savings and create capital.
The foundation will go into a village with a joint-venturepartner that puts up at least half of the capitalization, such asRotary Clubs or Catholic Relief Services, and identify a key woman.
At the meeting, the women circle illustrated examples ofquick-turnover work they want the loans to finance.
Each woman signs her name or provides a thumbprint ascollateral, agreeing to repay one-sixteenth of the loan weekly,plus interest of 1 percent to 3 percent, in line with local banks.
``Fifty percent or more are illiterate, and I would say 90percent of them don't have any idea of what they're getting intowhen
we start out,'' says Hatch.
But at the same time, each woman has been depositing weekly savingsof at least 20 percent of the original loan.
The United Nations has provided a $50,000 grant to research theeffects of women's empowerment through village banking on maternaland child health practices.
The foundation has major proposals pending with the Agency forInternational Development, the Ford Foundation, Citibank and theChase Manhattan Bank, among others.
Rotary Club 100, a Phoenix organization, and a Rotary Club ofMexico City are in a joint venture, having funded five villagebanks in Guaymas, Mexico, with another four to be launched in theslums of Mexico City.
As for whether such a system could work in the United States,Rotary's Rupp says, ``Frankly, it's the only hope we have ofchanging the welfare system.''
``Ultimately the way out of poverty is savings,''
Hatch adds.``It's got to be built on the back of their own savings.
