Introduction:As Congress goes back into session today, the gulf betweenlegislators and the American people has never been greater.
Arecent Gallup survey found that 70% of House Members opposethe idea of limiting the number of congressional terms, whilethe public backed the idea two to one.
Now a detailed NewYork Times/CBS poll has found that Members of Congress may bethe only demographic group in the country that doesn't favorlimits on terms.
The idea of limiting terms is overwhelmingly popular withAmericans regardless of party, ideology or income.
Martin Plissner,political director for CBS News, says he has "never seen anissue on which there was so little demographic variation.
The root of the problems with Congress is that, barringmajor scandal, it is almost impossible to defeat anincumbent.
In the past three elections, 96% or more of Houseincumbents who ran won.
Congress just violated its legal budgetdeadline; where are the special prosecutors?Franking privileges, huge staffs, gerrymandering andunfair campaign finance laws have combined to give incumbentsa grossly unfair advantage.
One out of four House districtsthis year likely will have an incumbent running with nomajor-party opposition -- up from one out of five in 1988.One-candidate races are now spreading to the Senate.
Critics of term-limits say that -- franked mail or not --it's wrong to blame Congress for the now nearly 100%re-election rates since it is just as easy to vote against anincumbent as for.
It is a political axiom that people won't votefor someone they know nothing about.
That takes money, andskewed campaign finance laws combined with taxpayer-paid junkmail effectively mean that only incumbents have the cash tomake themselves known and to be taken seriously by the media.
Incumbents ended the 1988 elections with $63 million leftover, while challengers were able to raise and spend a totalof only $39 million.
Some complain that limiting terms would infringe ondemocracy by not allowing voters to elect whom they please.
The polls indicate voters by two to one think the only waythey can control Congress effectively is by limiting terms.
We also note that these critics are not agitating in supportof Ronald Reagan's call for repeal of the two-term limit forPresidents.
A big problem of the current system limitingPresidents but not Congress is that this means politicalpower is constantly tipped in favor of the legislativebranch.
That's why the Washington, D.C.-basedAmericans to Limit Congressional Terms is asking states tocall for a constitutional amendment to limit terms.
This fall, thegroup will try to get both incumbents and challengers topledge they will not serve more than 12 years in office.
Self-imposed limits on office-holding were once part ofthis country's public-service ethic, with Members returningto private life after a couple of terms.
Inthe current House it is 8%.Term limitation, once the accepted American tradition, hasbeen replaced by congressional careerism.
They now think the voluntary service limitation ofthe past must be made mandatory.
