Introduction:   1990 is fast becoming one of the worstyears on record for tornadoes and flooding across the middle andsouthern sections of the nation.
So far this year, 726 tornadoes have touched down nationwide,well ahead of the 640 tornadoes recorded during the first sixmonths of last year, and the 30-year average of 482 tornadoesrecorded between January and July, said Frederick Ostby of theNational Severe Storms Forecast Center here.
The nation had 747 tornadoes in the first six months of 1973 _one of the biggest years for tornadoes since 1950, when theforecast center began keeping reliable records of the storms.
The culprit in this tornado barrage across the Plains is apersistent West Coast pattern of low pressure in the upperatmosphere that is keeping the jet stream anchored at a southernlatitude.
This year's storms seem particularly violent, as illustrated bythe March 13 tornado that cut a swath a mile wide and brought windsof 300 mph to a field in Kansas.
There is some kind of a readjustment beginning to take place in theupper atmosphere,'' he said.
However, a study of tornado trends indicates parts of theMidwest, particularly Kansas and Missouri, are heading into asix-year period of more intense tornadoes.
The study of tornadoes since early this century shows that theyare concentrated in regions for five- or six-year periods, saidMichael Smith, president of WeatherData Inc.
Tornadoes have caused 20 deaths this year,while an average year in the 1980s saw 52 deaths, and in the 1970snearly 100, Ostby said.
Ostby credited the quicker response to computers that allowmeteorologists to see many sources of data, such as satellitereadings, more clearly.
The death toll from last week's flash floods in Shadyside, Ohio,rose to 21 on Monday, making the flood one of the most deadly inrecent years.
The floods destroyed as many as 70houses and damaged up to 40, officials said.
An estimated 10,000 people were forced from their homes, andhigh water caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage.
