Introduction:   Workmen tunneling under the EnglishChannel have created the first land link between Britain and theContinent, connecting 31 miles of tunnel in a prodigious feat ofengineering and finance.
TransManche Link, the construction consortium building the``Chunnel'' said the historic linkup occurred at 8:25 p.m.
Tuesdaywhen British workers sent a probe 2 inches in diameter through totheir French colleagues.
Linking England and France, the tunnel symbolizes the growingunification of Europe.
It also fulfills a dream of Napoleon, whowanted to send his armies through the tunnel to conquer Britain.
Eurotunnel PLC, the Anglo-French consortium overseeing theworld's largest engineering project, plans for high-speed trains topass through the Channel Tunnel in June 1993.
Despite her countrymen's fears of losing their ancient moatagainst Europe, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher describedthe breakthrough as ``a very exciting moment.''
In London, the conservative Daily Express newspaper noted todaythat Britons will be able to walk to France for the first timesince the Ice Age.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' a construction unionofficial in Calais said.
Champagne corks popped and workers danced jigs after Frenchdrillers phoned news of the probe's arrival to their Britishcounterparts.
Technicians will be more certain Wednesday, but theycalled the rough line-up ``exceptional.''
The tunneling machine on the French side will then guide itselfby laser toward the British machine, ensuring perfect alignment.
The linkup came on the maintenance tunnel, the smallest of threetunnels being dug.
Eight workers suffered injures, two seriously, about 90 minutesafter Tuesday's linkup when a tractor rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
Since the tunnel construction began in 1987 there have beenseven accidental deaths on the British side and two on the Frenchside.
The tunnel's cost has soared from an initial estimate of $9.4billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion in caseof unforeseen cost overruns.
Whhen its work is done, the drilling machine on the French sidewill be hauled out in pieces.
The one on the British side will diga side passage, and be buried in cement.
The tunnels were joined 13{ miles southeast of Folkestone,England, the British terminus near Dover, and 10 miles northwest ofSangatte, near Calais.
The tunnel starts a few miles inland on each side, accountingfor its total length of 31 miles.
Militant workers on the French side are striking for more payand began a work slowdown Thursday, threatening to stall thelink-up.
The three-hour Paris-to-London trip would be comparable toflying, if transport to and from airports is included, and is halfthe time of the present car-ferry journey.
Britain warned Napoleon not to try to build the tunnel; diggingwas started subsequently in 1882 and 1974, but both efforts failed.
