Introduction:LJUBLJANA, Yugoslavia --
As federal army tanks and jetspounded the breakaway republic of Slovenia last week, thepin-striped brokers of the Ljubljana Stock Exchange defiedair-raid dangers and gathered in their sixth-floor tradingroom.
The price of vouchersto obtain foreign exchange jumped 10%, even though Slovenebanks had stopped issuing foreign currency.
"There is a certain logic to this," says DraskoVeselinovic, the exchange's chief executive.
"The two million people of this picturesque Alpine republicare waking up from their two-week nightmare sobered by theimplications of their intoxicating declaration of secessionfrom Yugoslavia on June 25.
Their bravado is undiminished,reflected in the almost unanimous feeling that there can beno going back now that blood has been spilled in defense ofindependence.
But there is also a growing unease about goingforward, because no one knows where Slovenia is headed.
For the moment, the Slovenes are feeling lonely,unrecognized by the nations of the world.
Their considerabletrade with the rest of Yugoslavia, which helped make them thecountry's richest people, is vanishing.
Their identity isbeing turned upside down; once known as Yugoslavia's"developed north," Slovenia will now be lumped together withWestern Europe's "underdeveloped south."
Nationalismovershadows pragmatism, a quality that once distinguishedSlovenia from the rest of the often bewildering Balkans.
Almost every country on thecontinent has its own disenchanted minorities, from theSoviet Baltics to French Corsica, that could be encouraged bythe independence declarations of Slovenia and the neighboringrepublic of Croatia.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has heldup recent events here -- the Yugoslav army assault onSlovenia and the bitter ethnic clashes between Croats andSerbs -- as a warning to his land of what can happen whennationalism fractures a country.
While the European Community is counting on the peace planit brokered to defuse tensions (it calls for a three-monthperiod of negotiations in Yugoslavia), most governmentsconcede that the country's breakup is inevitable.
"We have every sympathy for small peoples who aspire toaffirm their national identity by democratic methods," theSwiss foreign minister reportedly told a European conferenceon national minorities. "
"This shunning by Western Europe, and the U.S., isparticularly disillusioning for a people who enjoy theirBMWs, Peugeots and Fiats, their shopping trips to Munich andVenice and their vacation chalets in the Alps.
The Slovenes,from their days in the Austro-Hungarian empire, have alwaysconsidered themselves to be Westerners.
Nestled between the Alps and the Adriatic, Slovenia becamethe most prosperous patch of communist Europe.
The per capitaannual income of nearly $7,000 is 10 times that of thesouthern regions of Yugoslavia.
But as Slovenes measurethemselves with Western Europe, it is they who are the poorercousins.
Joze Mencinger, an economist and former finance ministerof Slovenia, illustrates the republic's economic resilienceby noting that while Yugoslavia's industrial output fell 18%so far this year, Slovenia's declined only 10%.
Slovenia's exportsof assembled cars, pharmaceuticals, refrigerators andfurniture account for a third of the total value of the goodsand services it produces.
Slovenia is counting onexpanding its already extensive ties with Austria (a jointventure between Austrian and Slovene companies recentlycompleted a high-tech Alpine tunnel opening another bordercrossing) as well as courting more business with its otherold Austro-Hungarian partners, Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
"It's not size that makes a country successful," saysJosip Skoberne, head of the international division of theSlovene Chamber of Economy, citing EC-member Luxembourg, farsmaller in population and area than Slovenia.
"Finding new markets in the West is all the more urgentwith the certain decline in Slovenia's trade with the rest ofYugoslavia.
A quarter of all goods produced in Slovenia arepurchased by other Yugoslavs, and Slovene leaders counted onmaintaining these ties even after declaring independence.
Butthe recent fighting, they believe, ended all hope of economicunion.
"Unbelievable," scoffs Mr. Skoberne as he reads a lettertelefaxed from the council of Banja Luka, a town with a largeSerbian population in the province of Bosnia-Hercegovina,decreeing that all Slovene-owned assets in the city are to beinventoried and frozen.
One of the major motivations behind Slovenia'sindependence grab was to free itself from the "Yugoslav risk"that hampered most attempts to attract foreign investment.
At the stock exchange, Mr. Veselinovic frets that hispost-independence plans to trade in gold, commodities andforeign currencies are jeopardized by the uncertaintyengulfing Slovenia.
"We had been getting a lot of interest from abroad, butthey won't invest now while things are so unsettled," hesays. "
