Introduction:   Shining Path rebels have formed a new front topush their insurgency into Lima and other coastal urban areas
,President Alan Garcia said after two powerful car bombs explodedwithin blocks of the Government Palace.
Garcia spoke Wednesday in an atmosphere of stepped up rebelattacks in Lima and a series of weekend raids around the capitalthat resulted in the seizure of five Shining Path safe houses and 31arrests.
The president, who leaves office July 28, said the newly formedPeople's Defense Revolutionary Movement, is the ``urban,metropolitan organ of the Shining Path.''
The Maoist-inspired Shining Path operates in at least half ofPeru, especially in the mountains and jungle, but has had littlesuccess in expanding to coastal cities.
At least 18,500 people have been killed in political violencerelated to the decade-old insurgency, which was launched in theAndean highlands.
The wave of violence comes four days before a presidential runoffthat pits novelist Mario Vargas Llosa, a free-market activist,against centrist agricultural engineer Alberto Fujimori.
In one of the guerrilla safehouses raided in an upper-class Limasuburb, police found tons of Shining Path documents and propaganda.
The raids also proved that the new urban front has been formed,Garcia said: ``The people who were captured were essential to thenew movement.''
Two people were injured in the car bombings near the GovernmentPalace on Tuesday night and Wednesday and Garcia called the upsurgein urban violence a ``desperate response'' to the weekend raids.
In other violence Wednesday in Lima, a city of 6 million, fourrebels armed with machine guns took over a neighborhood electoraloffice.
Guerrillas blew up at least three high-tension power pylonsTuesday night, blacking out parts of the capital and other coastalcities where most of Peru's 22 million people live.
Tuesday's car bomb went off behind Lima's Roman Catholiccathedral, which faces the main plaza where the Government Palace islocated.
Operating out of its stronghold in Ayacucho, the Shining Path hasspread throughout Peru's highlands since it launched its armedinsurgency in May 1980.
