Introduction:If Washington state imposes term limits on itscongressional delegation Tuesday, the issue of whether or notsuch limits are constitutional will take center stage.
Manylawyers and political scientists say no, arguing that neitherCongress nor the states may add to the age, citizenship andresidency qualifications set forth in the Constitution.
State statutes that bar first-time candidates from runningfor Congress have been held to add to the qualifications setforth in the Constitution and have been invalidated.
Forexample, the 1972 decision in Dillon v. Fiorina struck down aNew Mexico law requiring candidates entering a congressionalprimary to have belonged to their party for a year and to paya registration fee.
Florida's attorney general hasasked its state Supreme Court for an advisory opinion on aterm-limit initiative that would limit the state's members ofCongress to eight consecutive years in office.
Three U.S.House members, led by Democrat Larry Smith, have filed briefsasking the court to rule state term limits unconstitutional.
By 6 to 1, the California Supreme Court ruled this monththat the state's new term-limit law was constitutional.
Thecourt said the "state's strong interests in protectingagainst an entrenched, dynastic legislative bureaucracy"outweighed objections that term limits restrict voter choiceat the ballot box.
But the court's decision affected onlyterm limits on state officials; federal officeholders weren'tincluded in California's limits.
Nevertheless, the California decision demolished many ofthe legal arguments made by incumbents.
They claimed there isa "fundamental right to be a candidate for public office,"which they found among the "associational rights" in theFirst Amendment.
They argued that voters were denied theright to be represented by the same legislator indefinitely,and that term limits discriminated against incumbents anddenied them their right to equal protection of the laws.
Term limitations do not restrict the right to vote for acandidate because of his or her ideology or party.
Therefore,they do not deprive voters of the freedom to associate withcandidates based on their viewpoint or with any particularparty.
Rather, they prevent citizens from voting for aparticular candidate after he has served in office a setnumber of years.
In its 1972 decision Bullock v. Carter and again in its1982 decision Clements v. Fashing, the U.S. Supreme Courtdetermined that a particular candidate has no "fundamental"right to ballot access or to run for office.
They have never held reasonable,non-discriminatory restrictions on who may run a violation ofthe right to vote.
The Supreme Court has foundthat clause violated only in those cases where ballot accessrestrictions discriminate against the poor and against new,small or independent party candidates.
Unlike the age, residency and citizenship requirements,term limits do not prevent any non-incumbent from running forCongress.
Nor do they limit an incumbent who leaves office for a periodof time (six years in Washington state) from running again.
Moreover, term limits do not in any way modify the age,residency or citizenship requirements in the Constitution.
Consequently, the argument that term limits are"qualifications" just like those already in the Constitution-- and that therefore they can be added only by amending theConstitution -- isn't particularly convincing.
The Supreme Court has long held that the power to ensure afair electoral system, truly responsive representation inCongress and a high degree of citizen participation inelections rests with the states.
Brown, the Supreme Court upheld a California law thatprohibited an independent candidate from running for Congressbecause he had changed his registration to Independent lessthan 11 months before the election.
In explaining that interest, the court recognized that"there must be a substantial regulation of elections {by thestates} if they are to be fair and honest," and if some sortof order is to accompany the democratic process.
As recentlyas June of this year, the Supreme Court again reiterated thatthe states have reserved to themselves, via the TenthAmendment, "the power to regulate elections.
"Elsewhere, the court in 1988 ruled in South Carolina v.
Baker, that certain "extraordinary defects in the nationalpolitical process might render congressional regulation ofstate activities invalid under the Tenth Amendment."
Thecourt has not defined what it means by "extraordinarydefects," but surely the fact that 98% of House incumbentsare routinely re-elected and that one out of five incumbentsran with no major-party opposition in 1990 might qualify.
Where the incumbent is almost the pre-ordained winner in anelection, there is no effective competition of ideas orcandidates and incumbents are less responsive to the will
ofthe electorate.
On this basis, term limits merely ensure afair election system and the "republican form of government"guaranteed the states under the Constitution.
Should the court rule against term limits by the states,numerous other ballot access restrictions will likely bepassed that have many of the same effects as term limits.
States could allow an incumbent who has served a set numberof years in the same office to run again, but only as a"write-in" candidate.
If they count only on thecourts to safeguard their political castles, they may be infor a rude surprise.
