At the other end of the building, halfan hour later, a janitor pauses in his work and yawns.
A poor ventilation system that does little more thanrecycle old, stale air from one end of the building to another.
Millions ofAmerican office workers are getting more than they bargained for when theyinhale in a building that has no fresh air.
Along with oxygen, they may begetting flu and other infectious bugs from their co-workers.
That'sbecause, in today's modern office buildings, recirculated air can meanrecycled flu and other airborne infections.
The evidence comes from variousstudies of tuberculosis, measles and flu that spread in a manner that can onlybe explained by poor air ventilation.
"Modern office buildings are tight,"says Jon Rosenberg, public health officer in California's occupational healthprogram. "
"Experts
saythe problem is not the same as "sick building syndrome" -- a situation inwhich workers are exposed chronically to toxic chemicals and gases emittedfrom carpets, furniture and other building materials.
Nor is it to blame forlast month's outbreak in Richmond of Legionnaire's disease -- an illnesscaused by a bug linked to wet, damp spaces rather than poor ventilation.
But as in "sick building syndrome," it's the airtight environment that setsthe stage for problems.
So the infectious bugsthat a worker exhales at one end of the building can end up, via theventilation system, being inhaled at the other end.
People are the source," says Dr. Edward Nardell, who studiesairborne infections for the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
"In a study published in the Augustissue of the American Review of Respiratory Diseases, Nardell and colleaguesat Harvard Medical School found that an outbreak of tuberculosis documented inone unidentified government building could have been cut in half had theventilation been better.
The study found that 40 percent of the building'sworkers -- or 27 of 47 -- were infected with tuberculosis from one 30-year-oldsick employee.
"By recirculating the air,you spread it throughout the building," says Nardell.
"People who had nodirect contact with this case, might have been exposed in far reaches of thebuilding.
"If tuberculosis can spread in poorly ventilated buildings, socan other infectious bugs.
"This particular study deals onlywith TB," says Dr. Jonathan Samet, a respiratory-disease expert at theUniversity of New Mexico, "but the observations may apply to other organisms,such as the respiratory viruses that cause flu.
The building's ventilationsystem permitted circulation of some outdoor air -- 15 cubic feet per minute-- a low level commonly found in buildings since the 1930s.
Even lower levelsof outdoor air ventilation, below 10 cfm, have become common since 1973, thepost-oil embargo era.
In the study, Nardell estimated that if outdoor airventilation in the government building had been doubled -- to about 35 cubicfeet per minute, a level that Massachusetts recommends for buildings wheresmoking is permitted -- only half as many workers would have been infectedwith tuberculosis.
(check)
Tuberculosis can spread in homelessshelters, prisons and hospitals where ventilation is poor.
"It may survive several hours in dry air," says VernonKnight, a respiratory virus disease expert at Baylor College of Medicine inHouston.
"In those tight buildings, they continue to recirculate it, and theyprobably build up.
"Nardell and others recognize that the solution to thisproblem -- fixing or replacing ventilation systems to include more fresh air-- can be expensive.
Flu and colds will probably never be eliminated from theworkplace entirely, and it may not make sense to install a new ventilationsystem unless the air quality is very low.
In his tuberculosis study, hefound that the biggest benefit comes from improving the worst ventilationsystems that allow very little fresh air.
If the ventilation is moderatelyeffective but not ideal, further improvements yield only a slight decrease ininfectious
illness.
"YOU'RE INTERESTEDEmployees who think that poor air quality at their workplaceis contributing to health problems can call Cal-OSHA, a state agency thatmonitors worker safety and health.
