Introduction:
The accidental shooting death of a youngstockbroker by an officer looking for a burglar is one more strikeagainst a police force already struggling with allegations ofbrutality and racism.
Terry D. Barnes, 24, was shot between the eyes in his apartment.
Police said an officer investigating a report of a prowler hadentered the apartment at 3:30 a.m. and fired after Barnes got outof bed to see what was wrong.
It was the seventh shooting death involving Kansas City policeofficers this year.
``I just hope that this case will draw the line on where thepolice can kill an innocent man.
saidroommate Andy Brez, 23, who was sleeping in another bedroom whenpolice entered on Saturday.
Barnes was white, as is the officer who shot him; however, otherrecent incidents of alleged excessive force involved blackcitizens.
Two police officers, whose names werenot disclosed, noticed the door to his apartment was not tightlyshut and entered, authorities said.
Barnes made ``a kind of lunging motion,'' and the officerfired from about 5 to 8 feet, Mills said.
Friends of Barnes questioned whether his apartment door was ajarand whether he would have lunged at the officer.
``We are defending the officers being in that apartment,'' Millssaid.
``As for the shooting itself, we will make no assessment ofthe propriety of that until after the investigation.''
Police Chief StevenBishop said before the latest slaying that the department'sstanding has fallen in the community, and a ``behaviormodification'' program is being developed for offending officers.
``We're part of the problem out there on the street, and we'vegot to get back to good, basic police work,'' Bishop said afterBarnes' death.
In June, several white officers bloodied a Nigerian-born RomanCatholic priest with nightsticks as he lay on the ground.
In May, another black clergyman was hit on the head with ashotgun by a white officer while lying on the ground.
In another case, three undercover officers were suspended for ashooting this spring that left a young black man crippled.
Theofficers and the victim accused each other of starting the fightthat led to the shooting.
``This is a tragic chain of events that is regrettable for Mr.
Barnes' family and for this officer,'' Bishop said.
``The officerswere reacting appropriately to a number of circumstances whichtogether led them to that apartment.''
He would have been a good husband and agood father,'' said Barnes' fiancee, Alison Brady.
