Introduction:Over the past two years, the Ventura County district attorney's office in four separate incidents has declined to prosecute suspects who contended that they were victims of police brutality while being arrested for various offenses by Oxnard officers, records show.
In a fifth and more recent incident, the district attorney's office declined to file a charge of assaulting an officer against an Oxnard man who says he and several other guests at a June 15 private party were beaten by Oxnard police.
The men involved in three of the five incidents have filed police brutality lawsuits against the city, the department or the police officers involved.
Edward Brodie, misdemeanor supervisor for the office, said the decisions not to prosecute the suspects do not necessarily mean that Oxnard police were not justified in making the arrests.
In each of the four cases, Brodie said, his office did not prosecute because it found that police did not provide enough evidence to prove the charges "beyond a reasonable doubt."
But Jean Farley, a supervisor for the Ventura County public defender's office, said it is extremely rare for the district attorney's office not to prosecute a suspect who is accused by police.
The district attorney's office may have declined to prosecute the suspects because police brutality has been alleged, she said.
Prosecution is usually turned down when the arresting officer is suspected of using excessive force, she said.
He said, however, that the decisions by the district attorney's office not to prosecute the suspects do not reflect poorly on the department.
Flores and his brothers, Alex, 19, and Luis Jr., 24 -- all of whom suffered gashes and scrapes on their heads and bodies -- said the officers beat them without provocation.
Police had arrested Flores on suspicion of assaulting an officer and of resisting arrest but the district attorney's office decided two weeks later to prosecute Flores on the five misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest. "
In an incident April 7, Sergio E. Gonzalez, 19, accused Oxnard officers of ordering a police dog to attack him before he was arrested.
In a suit filed June 29, Gonzalez said he was standing on Sunkist Circle when the dog attacked him, biting him on the arm and left shoulder.
According to a police report filed by Officer Michael Cole, police were sent to a parking lot outside the Oxnard Moose Lodge to investigate a report of an altercation between several men after a wedding reception.
Police arrested Gonzalez on suspicion of disturbing the peace, Brodie said.
But the district attorney's office declined to file any charges because the police report failed to show that Gonzalez was involved in the altercation, Brodie said.
Fox said Gonzalez did not attend the wedding but was visiting a friend nearby and went to the parking lot to find out what was causing the commotion.
In a third incident, Louis M. Cornett, a retired teacher and licensed gun dealer, said he was beaten on Oct. 20 while in custody at Oxnard police headquarters.
Officer Robert Camarillo said in a police report that Cornett was arrested in the 3600 block of Taffrail Road on suspicion of brandishing a weapon, resisting arrest and possessing a loaded firearm.
Camarillo said in the report that he stopped Cornett while investigating a complaint of a man waving a gun from a car and threatening youngsters packed into another vehicle.
But a lawsuit against Camarillo filed May 8, 1989, alleges that while in custody at the police station, Camarillo shoved and punched Cornett in the mouth. "
Cornett, maintaining that he never struggled with the officer, said he suffered a broken tooth and a cut lip during the beating.
The district attorney's office declined to file charges against Cornett because, Brodie said, there was insufficient evidence to prove that Cornett brandished a gun.
Guzman-Flores said he was working in a motorcycle repair shop on Jan. 27, 1989, when his boss asked him to investigate a noise in the alley behind the shop in the 1500 block of South Pine Street.
In a suit filed against the city Nov. 14, 1989, the Police Department and officers Jana Younger, Fred Sedillos and James Struck, Guzman-Flores contends that he was grabbed from behind by Younger while in the alley.
The officer poked him with a baton and questioned him about a car parked nearby, Guzman-Flores said in the suit.
The Police Department declined to release Flores' arrest report because, police officials said, it contains his criminal history.
But Flores' lawyer, Sherrie L. McCracken, said the report states that officers were at the shop responding to a complaint of a man with a gun.
McCracken said the officers continued to question Flores in English, but Flores -- a recent immigrant from Mexico who speaks only Spanish -- could not respond.
Flores was handcuffed and shoved to the ground, causing Sedillos to trip and fall on him, according to the suit.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Flores but later dismissed all charges during Flores' trial because police failed to turn over a recording of a dispatcher's call requesting that officers investigate the incident at the motorcycle shop, McCracken said.
In another incident, Luis C. Luna, 50, alleges in a complaint filed with the city on June 27, 1989, that he was beaten by three officers near a restaurant in Port Hueneme.
Luna said in an interview that he, his wife and several friends were leaving the restaurant on July 16, 1988, when an Oxnard police car pulled up in front of the group.
Luna, a public works inspector for the city of Port Hueneme, said he walked up to the police car and asked Officer Peter Ruggiero "in a kidding manner" what he was doing in Port Hueneme. "
The officer jumped out and started pushing me back against the pillar in front of the building, using his baton on my throat," Luna said in the complaint.
When he asked the officer why he was being shoved, Ruggiero told him that he was under arrest, according to the complaint.
Officers Steven Vendt and Humberto Jimenez were called to assist Ruggiero, the complaint said.
"They used forcible brutality by hitting me with the baton on my elbow, knees and back, forcing me to drop down on the sidewalk with my face slammed against the pavement," Luna said in the complaint.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Luna, but in September, 1988 -- before his trial began -- all charges against him were withdrawn for lack of evidence, Brodie said.
Luna had asked the city for $50,000 for medical expenses and to compensate for "humiliation suffered in public."
He failed, however, to submit the claim for damages during the statutory six-month period after the incident and was barred by law from filing a lawsuit.
