Introduction:MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Friday nights used to be slow at TheFault Line, a nightclub here on busy Poplar Avenue.
But afterword spread that a major earthquake was forecast for Dec. 3in the Midwest, The Fault Line began throwing earthquakeparties.
On Friday nights now, hundreds of patrons pour into theclub to swig "Earthquake shooters" and sign up to win Dec. 3Earthquake Escape Packages to the Bahamas or Hot Springs,Ark.
But even as Memphians whoop it up, the prediction that theBig One may come in December is triggering tremors up anddown the Mississippi Valley.
Shaken, thousands of people arecrowding into earthquake survival classes.
In Missouri and Arkansas, some schools and businesses haveannounced plans to close in early December.
, who will take her two youngsters and spend several dayswith relatives in North Carolina. "
In 1811 and 1812, along a120-mile zig-zag formation called the New Madrid fault, aseries of quakes ravaged the Midwest.
Researchers estimatethose earthquakes ranked stronger than 8 on the RichterScale, which hadn't been invented yet.
And as tons of soil and rock bed pitched androlled in a seismic frenzy, new waterfalls spiked up, causingpart of the mighty Mississippi River to flow backward forseveral hours.
The New Madrid (pronounced MAD-rid) fault still has 150small, mostly unfelt, earthquakes a year.
In the next 10years, experts warn, the area has a 33% chance of a quakemeasuring 7.1.
"We're overdue for one inthe 6s and low 7s," says David Stewart, an earthquake expertat Southeast Missouri State University.
Over the years, a few pinpoint-on-the map towns have triedto capitalize on the little-known fault.
New Madrid, Mo., thefault's namesake, draws tourists to a museum with exhibits onthe 19th century devastation.
And Paragould, Ark., has heldearthquake festivals with events like the "Miss Faultless"beauty contest.
But as Monday, Dec. 3, approaches, the whole matter isbecoming more serious.
That's because the predictor hasgained credibility in some important circles for his work onthe climate.
Iben Browning, a 72-year-old scientist, predictedOctober's Bay Area quake a week before it happened, saypeople who heard him speak to the Equipment ManufacturersInstitute.
And he predicted "geological danger" on Sept. 19,1985, along a band of latitude that included Mexico City --where a massive quake struck on that day.
Mr.
Browning, who has a Ph.D. in physiology, genetics andbacteriology, writes a climate newsletter out of New Mexico.
He has clients, such as PaineWebber Inc., who have long paidfor his wisdom on how the weather will affect theiragricultural investments.
Since 1971, Mr. Browning says, he has picked the correctdates of four large earthquakes, two volcanoes -- and one daywith both a volcano and an earthquake.
He bases his forecasts on tidal forces caused by thepositions of the sun and the moon -- an old theory, criticssay, that doesn't wash.
On Dec. 3, those forces are expectedto be at a 27-year high.
The New Madrid area has a 50-50 chance of producing atleast a 7 quake on Dec. 3, give or take a day or two oneither side, Mr. Browning says.
At that time, a similar quakehas a lesser chance of occurring on California's San Andreasor Hayward faults, according to Mr. Browning, and an 8.2quake in Tokyo has a greater chance.
"No responsible scientist can predictan exact day for an earthquake," says Brian Mitchell, a quakeexpert at St. Louis University, echoing the majority opinion.
But Mr. Browning shouldn't be written off so quickly, saysSoutheast Missouri State's Mr. Stewart,
who recently spentfour days with Mr. Browning. "
He has a methodology that candetermine, plus or minus a window of a day or two, anenhanced probability of a volcano or an earthquake in certainlatitudes," says Mr. Stewart.
"No one else has been able toreplicate it, but that doesn't mean it's wrong."Mr.
But asked if he enjoys being right, he says, "It's the onlydamn thing that matters.
If one is a business consultant,they don't pay you for being wrong.
"All of this has changed life in places like Blytheville,Ark.
(pop: 24,314), tucked amid vast flat farmland, right atthe corner of the Arkansas, Tennessee and Missouri borders.
So many people plan to skip town on Dec. 3 that theFlexible Technologies tubing plant already plans to shut downfor two days, at a cost of thousands of dollars.
Says JimmyConnell, plant superintendent, "It's going to be a ghost townaround here.
"Robert Edwards, a Blytheville fireman who teaches seminarsin earthquake survival, has become a hot property.
It is 9 a.m.on a rainy Saturday, and 325 Osceolans, gripping legal padsand spiral notebooks, fill the high school auditorium for anall-day session on earthquake preparedness.
With his boomingvoice, Mr. Edwards lays out a grim scenario: "One hundred andfifty thousand dead in Memphis instantly -- instantly.
"After
the seminar, two elderly sisters, both widows, spliton what to do.
Fearing their home will be looted, Bess Mann,86 years old, wants to ride it out.
But her sister, HalliePeterson, 83, wants to stay with their nephew in Mississippi.
Scared that the big Memphis-Arkansas bridge that spans theMississippi River will collapse in a quake, she's charting analternate route two hours out of her way.
Some schools practice earthquakedrills, while others sponsor cake sales to buy survival kitsfor classrooms, with items like blankets, flashlights andradios.
Michael Prince, a child psychologist in Jonesboro, says heknows of 10 to 15 children, age four to nine, so unnervedthat they've reverted to bed-wetting or extreme anxiety aboutbeing separated from their parents.
Trying to calm the fear, the National EarthquakePrediction Evaluation Council, a panel of academic andgovernment seismic experts, will review the Browning claim ata meeting in a few weeks.
In 11 years of studying predictionmethods, the panel has found no bona fide approach.
"But this one," says Randall Updike, the executivesecretary, "has created such chaos in the mid-continentregion that we felt we had to give our advice."Mr.
