Introduction:
The focus of the drought plaguing much of thenation has shifted eastward, but little relief is in sight for mostareas, the National Weather Service reported Thursday.
The new short-range forecast through next Monday calls for hot,dry weather to expand eastward from the Rockies through the OhioValley to the Mid-Atlantic states.
Rapidly moving weather systems are expected to drag weak frontsalong the U.S.-Canadian border, possibly triggering scatteredshowers in the extreme northern Plains and upper MississippiValley.
Long-term drought conditions now cover a large area of the GreatLakes region and the Ohio and Tennessee valleys, the agency'sClimate Analysis Center reported.
In addition, drought conditions persist over large areas of thenorthern Great Plains and Rocky Mountains.
And a separate climate assessment added that manyareas now experiencing extreme drought have less than a 4 percentchance of recovering from the drought within 3 months.
On Tuesday, the Agriculture Department announced sharpreductions in the anticipated harvest of many crops because of thewater shortage _ and those projections were based on the assumptionof normal weather from here on, according to department officials.
The drought region now extends well into West Virginia andincludes nearly all of Ohio and Indiana and much of Kentucky andTennessee, the weather service drought advisory said.
On the otherhand, western portions of the Mississippi Valley have received somerelief due to recent rains.
The drought has been accompanied by higher than normaltemperatures over much of the nation, most notably over the westernGreat Lakes region.
The national picture shows the current drought to be aboutequivalent to that of 1911, and still somewhat less severe than inseveral years in the 1930s or 1956.
Reservoir levels remain close to average in much of the nation,however, the weather service noted.
In addition to Thursday's short-range forecast, the medium-rangeoutlook through July 23 anticipates much of the nation will remainhotter than normal, particularly the Tennessee Valley, lowerMidwest, central and northern Great Plains, northern Rockies andGreat Basin.
Most of the hot area is expected to be drier than normal,although some significant rain could penetrate northwestward fromTexas into New Mexico, Colorado and eastern Wyoming.
