Introduction:
Exxon crews Tuesday finished pumping theremaining crude oil out of the tanker Exxon Valdez in preparationfor refloating and removing the source of the nation's worst-everoil spill.
Meanwhile, Exxon said placing an oil-catching boom around theship immediately after the grounding could have touched off a giantexplosion of gases from the oil, although that was not the reasonit took 11 hours to set the first containment line.
A boom wasn't placed around the vessel for 11 hours because itwasn't available in Valdez, Exxon officials have said.
Iarossi also said Exxon has changed its policy because of thespill and now requires crews to be aboard ship, where drinking isprohibited, four hours before sailing.
Early Tuesday, Exxon said it had finished transferring about 42million gallons of crude to three other ships.
Another 42 milliongallons of oily waste water remained aboard the Valdez, whichspilled more than 10 million gallons of crude into Prince WilliamSound when it struck a reef March 24.
If freed, the still-leaking ship, which has eight holes some 20feet long in its hull, will be towed to a remote and already fouledcove for repairs.
Port officials there said theyweren't sure if they'd allow that, even though the $12 millionrepair bill would provide about 200 jobs.
``We're not willing to trade in the environment for jobs,''Portland port spokesman Darrel Buttice said Monday.
Neil Goldschmidt said Tuesday there are ``a lot ofquestions that need to be answered'' before the Valdez is allowedin.
Canadian authorities also asked Exxon for assurances there willbe no damage to the British Columbia coast if the tanker is towedto Oregon, and the mayor of Valdez said the ship was not welcomeback in the port where it took on the load of crude.
In Washington, Environmental Protection Administrator WilliamReilly said the spill could put the brakes on petroleum explorationthere and in other areas.
``We will take apart the environmentalplanning for every aspect of oil development in Alaska and in othersensitive areas where the environment potentially could bethreatened,'' he told a House appropriations subcommittee.
The family of the fired Exxon Valdez captain, Joseph Hazelwood,said the skipper wants to surrender but is awaiting advice from hisattorney, according to Lt.
Thomas Fazio, commander of the New YorkState Police on Long Island.
But after Long Island law enforcement authorities waited asecond day for Hazelwood to turn himself in, the Suffolk Countydistrict attorney's office announced there would be no surrenderthat day.
Of about three dozen oil-soaked otters rescued following thespill, about one-third have died, Alaska Department of Fish andGame spokesman Jon Lyman said.
``Dozens of otters are dying beforerescuers can get to them,'' he said.
An effort at Sawmill Bay, 11 miles west of Valdez, to keep oilaway from a hatchery where 2 million salmon are waiting to bereleased to the sea appeared to be failing.
U.S. Sen. Frank Murkowski, a champion of oil exploration inAlaska, asked that plans for drilling in Bristol Bay, the state'srichest fishing grounds, be set aside until the industry candemonstrate that it can respond effectively to spills.
``The Exxon Valdez accident has taught us that simply having aplan is not sufficient,'' the Alaska Republican said.
At the first Valdez City Council meeting since the spill, twocouncil members and Mayor John Devens expressed concern that angerand frustration over the spill was surfacing as harrassment ofpipeline company workers and their children.
Meanwhile, a multimillion-dollar class-action lawsuit was filedMonday in federal court in California against Exxon Corp., chargingthat the spill has led to gas prices of 10 to 15 cents more agallon for California drivers.
