Introduction:
The brutal beating of Rodney Glen King by Los Angelespolicemen offers convincing evidence that a code of silenceexists within that department, but it also illustrates asimilar reluctance of the nation's police chiefs to criticizea fellow chief.
Thesecriminals in uniform would not have dared their brutality hadthey feared that any of the 17 other police officers watchingwould report their criminal actions.
Blatant racist jokes and comments about the beating on thepolice communications system make it hard to believe thatthis was an "aberration" as Chief Daryl Gates claims.
Theculture of the department that allowed the brutalizing ofRodney Glen King was created under Mr. Gates's leadership.
Yet we, his fellow police chiefs, have for years remainedsilent about Mr. Gates, who yesterday was put on a 60-dayleave by the Los Angeles Police Commission.
Gates has made public statements clearly at odds with thenew concept of community policing, in which officers workwith citizens to improve neighborhoods and prevent crime.
Afew years ago Chief Gates referred to gang members as "dirtylittle cowards," and warned them that "there is resoundingapplause to every fall of the hammer."
Mr.
Gates would have been better advised to seek communityprograms for jobs, education, elimination of prejudice andimprovement of neighborhoods.
But this kind of reasoning isforeign to a man who publicly claimed that his SWAT teamcould free the Iranian hostages.
The Police Corps wouldsend idealistic young people, including minorities, to servea three -- or four -- year tour of duty after collegegraduation in return for federal funding of their educations.
Mr. Gates's statement did nothing to lessenthe tragedy of the fallen officer, but like his statementabout blacks, it gave comfort to bigots within and outsidethe department.
And it hardly reduced conflict in a citywhere
the majority of the population is made up of minoritieswho need and deserve police protection, whether or not theyare citizens.
The unit had advance knowledge that crimeswere about to occur, but often stayed outside and letrobberies occur, even though innocent retailers and customerswere put at risk.
The unit has been allowed to continue tooperate despite its high shooting rate -- or, worse still,because of the shootings.
Mr. Gatesreluctantly admitted that the officers who did the ransackingwere wrong, but said he could understand their frustration intrying to fight drugs.
Even more recently, Mr. Gates told theSenate that "casual drug users should be taken out and shot.
Mayor Tom Bradley told themedia that such conduct wouldn't be tolerated, and that thewrongdoers would be sought out for punishment.
Mr. Gates saidthat while he was shocked, he wasn't drawing conclusions andwould look into the "background," of the incident.
He hascalled for prosecution of three of the officers, and hasproduced a videotape for his troops condemning the beating.
But condemnation of misconduct and excessive force shouldhave been a constant message from the command staff beforethe brutality, and not an afterthought.
Yet, it's hard toimagine commanders preaching restraint in light of thechief's constant belligerent pronouncements.
It is hard to imaginesomeone unlawfully beaten by uniformed officers as otherslooked on being inspired to respect law and order.
Or was thechief suggesting that the beating was a warning againstfurther run-ins with the police?Clearly, Daryl Gates's words and actions create doubtabout his claim that the Rodney King incident was anaberration.
Public opinion polls in Los Angeles show themajority of people believe police brutality is common, andthey disapprove of the way Mr. Gates has done his job.
Mr.
Gates's military style of policing is at odds withthat in the rest of the country, and it's about time policeleaders publicly repudiated it.
It has cast a cloud over policing that won't belifted until police chiefs drop their own code of silence andspeak out against one of their own's peculiar philosophy ofpolicing.
