The situation is dramatic, and Yugoslavia threatens atany moment to break apart," Gen. Marko Negovanovic, a member of the generalstaff, said on Belgrade television.
His statement, just a day after both sides agreed to a cease-fire,indicated that a plan to resolve the state's ethnic, political and economicdisputes had gone off the rails less than 18 hours after it was accepted.
Earlier Saturday evening, Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic forced yetanother delay in the election of Stipe Mesic, a Croat, as president ofYugoslavia.
Mesic election was keyMesic's election was the politicalkeystone in the peace plan, which also called for the federal troops inSlovenia to return to the barracks and for a three-month delay by thebreakaway republics of Slovenia and Croatia in carrying out their independencedeclarations.
The Tanjug news agencyreported that 200,000 Serbs were expected to join a territorial militia inSerbia, the biggest Yugoslav republic, which opposes independence for Sloveniaand Croatia, and Negovanovic said Croatia had ordered a mobilization of its"police" reserves.
Urgent legislative meetingSlovenia's parliament wascalled into emergency session after a 12-point list of demands from the armywas presented to republic leaders, insisting that all impediments to federalarmy operations be removed as part of a Western-brokered cease-fire.
Thepeace package was assembled by federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic, brokeredby an emergency mission of the European Community and accepted by the leadersof Slovenia and Croatia, as well as Serbia.
But Saturday night Markoviccharged that Slovenia's President Milan Kucan had "torpedoed" the plan byinsisting that the moratorium on independence had to be approved by hisparliament to take effect.
Condition upon conditionMilosevic, seizingon Kucan's statement, insisted that Serbia would not allow Mesic to becomepresident in the normal rotation until the Slovenian and Croatian parliamentsagreed to the moratorium.
The Slovenian government charged the army withrepeated breaches of the cease-fire and demanded the surrender of army unitsand installations that Slovenian forces had surrounded and cut off since thefighting began Thursday.
At the end of the day, the maneuvering by allthree republics ensured a prolongation of the crisis that has deprived thecountry of a civilian commander in chief for more than six weeks andeffectively left the army to make its own moves.
"The Yugoslav army appeared to be beefing up its militarypresence in Slovenia, sending additional tanks across Croatia toward Sloveniaand dispatching two warships from Split, in Croatia, to the port of Koper, inSlovenia.
Casualties mountAtleast
40 people were killed in the first two days of fighting in Slovenia,including 20 federal army soldiers, four Slovenian fighters and 12 civilians,said Janez Jansa, the Slovenian defense minister.
Ljubljana, the Slovenian capital, was anarmed camp, where armed civilians and territorial guards stopped people atrandom and demanded identification cards.
Driving across the republic, whichis about the size of Maryland, was difficult because of checkpoints byterritorial guards, barricades of trucks or the wrecks of Slovenian vehiclesdestroyed by Yugoslav government tanks.
Croatia digs inThe situationalso seemed to be deteriorating in Croatia, which announced that it washalting all contributions to the central government and would send no morerecruits to the federal army.
In Zagreb, the Croatian capital, federalmilitary aircraft flew low, and federal garrisons stood on full alert.
Croatian peasants, fearing a surprise attack, reportedly hid in the woods nearthe Slovenian border 50 miles north of the capital.
"Austria and Hungary sent armoredunits to the Slovenian border, describing the action as precautionary.
Thecrisis evoked further expressions of anguish from foreign leaders, and for thefirst time a high-placed U.S. official hinted that the administration may beweighing the possibility of recognizing Croatia and Slovenia. "
The presidentand the secretary (of state) have never said 'never,' " Deputy Secretary ofState Lawrence Eagleburger said in a television interview.
The StateDepartment said Saturday that U.S. dependents at its consulate in Zagreb,Croatia's capital, were being allowed to leave Yugoslavia.
TheState Department made the announcement a day after urging Americans inSlovenia and Croatia to leave as soon as they could and suggesting thatAmericans defer non-essential travel to Yugoslavia until the tensions subside.
