Since Slovenia'sdeclaration of independence in June 1991, the gap between the peaceful,ethnically homogeneous new republic of 2m people and the war-impoverishedrest of former Yugoslavia has widened inexorably.
But he, like Mr Janez Drnovsek, the prime minister of Slovenia'sthree-pronged coalition government, makes clear that Slovenia sufferseconomically from the disintegration of Yugoslavia and would be one of theprincipal gainers from a resolution of the bloody Balkan imbroglio.
'Slovenia's southern border with Croatia has become the border between peaceand war in Europe,' Mr Kucan declares.
At its narrowest point, only a 46km- long strip of Slovenian coast- line separates Italy from the rest offormer Yugoslavia.
Austria is insulated from the war-torn regions of Croatiaand Bosnia-Herzegovina, both once ruled by the Austrian Habs- burgs, thanksto its own 324 km-long border with Slovenia.
The new Karavanke road tunnel beneath the Alps, completed justbefore the 10-day war between Slovenia and the Yugoslav army whichimmediately followed indep- endence, has underlined Slovenia's traditionalimportance as a transit route.
The railways and the motorway leading south through the capital Ljubljana tothe Slovenian port of Koper and its Italian neighbour Trieste carry freightand travellers heading to and from central Europe and the Adriatic sea.
Thehighway is also thick with aid trucks and an ever-decreasing volume
of'normal' cargoes moving south-east towards Croatia.
Independence has, above all, brought peace to Slovenia and left it free toimplement the kind of rational market reforms and privatisation policieswhich remain blocked in the republics absorbed and impoverished by warfurther south.
Slovenia, with its self- contained infrastructure and proximity to westernmarkets, was always by far the richest republic of the former federation.
Its per capita GDP of around Dollars 6,000 was three times higher than thatof Serbia and five times that of Kosovo, the poorest region of the formerYugoslavia.
But it alsobenefited from the overnight stays of foreign tourists heading further southto Croatia's Dalmatian coast.
Now the once-thriving seaside hotels arefilled with discons- olate refugees and Croatia's main source of hardcurrency income has disappeared.
Above all, Slovene enterprises were able to build up exports to the rest ofEurope, thanks to the volume of sales they were able to make in Yugoslaviawhich virtually gave them a 22m strong domestic market.
The UN embargo on trade with Serbia means both the loss of the largest ofthe former Yugoslav markets and an end to cheap Serbian raw materials andother inputs.
On the positive side of the balance sheet, however, the end of the federalstate means that Slovenia no longer has to contribute over Dollars 1bn ayear to finance the bloated Yugoslav army or see its hard currency deposits'frozen' by the National Bank of Yugoslavia, as happened beforeindependence.
The plant was built and financedjointly to supply electricity to both republics but financially hard-pressedCroatia is now reluctant to pay its share of the running costs.
But a mixture ofcompassion for the suffering of their fellow southern Slavs and economicloss ensures that the Slovene authorities, while categorically ruling outany possibility of resuming old political ties with former Yugoslavia, pray,without much hope, for a quick and lasting solution to the conflict and theresumption of normal economic ties.
The war, with its violent and deliberate displacement of millions of people,has and is taking place in the ethnically mixed border lands of Croatia andBosnia relatively distant from the Slovene border.
Both Mr Kucan and MrDrnovsek, who headed the old revolving Yugoslav state presidency for a yearbefore negotiating the exodus of the federal army from Slovenia in July1991, criticise the failure of the west to intervene more forcibly to stopat an early stage what Mr Kucan calls 'the war of aggression waged bySerbia.
But for the inter-national community it is essential to define it as a war of aggressionagainst a UN- recognised state and draw the appropriate conclusions.
It is atragedy that Bosnia's elected leader has now been reduced by theinternational com- munity to merely one of sev- eral ethnic leaders,' headds.
Preventing the war in parts of former Yugoslavia destabilising Slovenia andscaring off tourists remains a top priority for the new republic.
The border with Croatia is now in effect sealed against further immigationafter 70,000 refugees, equivalent to 3.5 per cent of the local population,were taken in.
Refugees are housed and cared for by local authorities aroundthe country, often in former Yugoslav army barracks, at an annual cost ofaround Dollars 250m.
Meanwhile, the coalition government which emerged from last December'selections to the national parliament and parallel presidential elections, isdetermined to use its four-year mandate to complete the transformation ofthe country into a fully-fledged, market-orientated, multi-partyparliamentary democracy.
At the core of the government is an alliance between the Liberal Democrats,headed by Mr Drnovsek, which emerged as the largest single party with 25 percent of seats in parliament, and the Christian Democrats led by Mr LojzePeterle, the foreign minister.
The inclusion of the 'left- wing' parties, with their traditional links toworkers and the trade unions showed its value last month when they twicegave their assent to a new wages pact designed to reduce real incomes.
Independent economists calculate that average real incomes have to fallaround 10 per cent from current levels of around DM650 a month if theSlovenian economy is to compete effectively for new markets in the west andattract foreign investment.
But much has been achieved in the first20 months of independence - including the establishment of a parliamentarydemocracy and a virtually convertible independent currency, the Slovenetolar, backed by strong reserves.
The new republic is peaceful,internationally recognised and a member of the most important inter-national institutions.
As elsewhere in the region, privatisation and other structural reforms areseen as laying the basis for the development of a self-confident middleclass capable of ensuring that the democratic and economic reforms under wayin Slovenia become irreversible.
