Introduction:
A lightning-sparked fire in Utah's Zion National Park spread outof control to 1,100 acres Tuesday, but rain helped firefightershold the line on a 2,000-acre forest fire in Montana and two othermajor fires in Wyoming.
Gusty winds spread a third Wyoming fire over 400 acres of theBridger-Teton National Forest and forced the evacuation of acampground and summer cabins on Freemont Lake, a half mile from theblaze.
A fire that scorched 1,130 acres in and around the HiawathaNational Forest in Michigan was linked to a vehicle exhaust pipe.
Hundreds of small grass and brush fires were reported over theJuly 4 weekend, some caused by fireworks, in various parts of thecountry.
Ray Wood, regional ranger for the New YorkDepartment of Environmental Conservation in the Hudson Valley.``Fireworks were touching off fires all over the place.
``We have evidence confirming that it was a bottle rocket,''said Mary Hale, a spokeswoman for the California Department ofForestry.
More than 670 firefighters from federal, state and localagencies cut trails in the rugged terrain by hand and usedairplanes to drop fire retardant, officials said.
Kentucky's Division of Forestry reported 85 fires burned 1,267acres in the first four days of July, compared to an average of 18fires and 165 acres for the whole month, spokesman Richard Greensaid.
But Dwight Barnett, a spokesman for the Tennessee Division ofForestry, said there were 26 wildland fires on the Fourth of July,which burned just 113 acres.
``We were very relieved to get through the weekend in such goodshape,'' he said, citing partly the care taken by people playingwith fireworks.
It was allowed to burn in a small area, buton Sunday wind to 60 mph spread the flames, and the fire nearlydoubled in size from early Tuesday to midday.
Weekend rain helpedkeep it from spreading outside the wilderness boundary, said fireinformation Officer Jo Barnier in Billings.
Phil Jaquith, Beartooth District ranger for theforest, said Forest Service policy is to allow wilderness fires toburn unless they threaten trails or structures or are about tospread outside the wilderness boundary.
A day after rain beat down the flames of a 1,650-acre fire inthe Shoshone National Forest in northwest Wyoming, firefighterswere able to reinforce fire lines around the blaze in the absenceof strong winds.
Park spokeswoman Amy Vanderbilt said the ``fan fire'' in thepark's northwest corner had held at 1,800 acres, while two otherfires in the southern section of the park continued to burn overabout 90 acres.
Because all three fires are in the backcountry noefforts were being made to douse the flames, she said.
The evacuation in the Bridger-Teton forest was a precaution andthe fire started to die down somewhat as temperatures dropped atnighttime, forest spokesman Fred Kingwill said.
The blaze apparently was sparked by fireworks over the holidayweekend, Kingwill said.
In Michigan, authorities concluded a hot exhaust pipe or exhaustparticles triggered the Upper Peninsula fire, said Mary Mumford,spokeswoman for Hiawatha National Forest.
Firefighters also battled two smaller fires that broke out onthe Upper Peninsula Tuesday, burning 220 acres, Department ofNatural Resources spokesman Bob Heyd said.
In California, about 190 firefighters battled a wildfire thatburned 350 acres of brush Tuesday across steep terrain in an areaof
Los Padres National Forest untouched by fire in 64 years, saidEarl Clayton of the U.S. Forest Service.
