Introduction:
Shortly before 10:30 this morning California time, nature turned off the sun'slight switch and darkness over Hawaii and Mexico signaled the beginning of the"The Eclipse of the Millennium.
""Oh, my God," exclaimed one spectatorafter another at a mountaintop observatory atop Mauna Kea as the sky went dark.
From Hawaii to Mexico to Central America, more than 40 million people sawthe moon obscure so much of the sun that only a blazing ring was visible.
InHawaii, Mauna Loa erupted for the first time in six years, stunning scientistsby releasing a dazzling fountain of lava at the height of the eclipse.
Andin the Bay Area, more than half the sun was covered when the eclipse peaked at11:20
a.m.
It looks like someone took a bite out of an apple," said MatthewMauranoh, 8, of Mountain View, who peered through a homemade black box at theFoothill Observatory.
The view was diminished for many in Hawaii andMexico, where low cloud cover obscured the celestial display.
In the160-mile-wide swath from Hawaii to Baja to Mexico to Brazil, the morningturned into night -- the only region where the eclipse made the Earth totallydark.
Clouds obscured eclipseAs totality arrived at sea level on theBig Island, the sun was hidden by a cloud layer.
At the astronomy observatoryat the top of 13,800-foot Mauna Kea, high cirrus clouds thwarted three of the10 scientific experiments.
It still got dark, but the clouds disappointedabout 500 people gathered on the driving range at the Mauna Lani resort insouth Kohala.
"I came especially for this, and hope we get to seeit," said Margaret MacLeod, a mathematics and science teacher from ManhattanBeach shortly before the eclipse in Hawaii.
"If we don't get to see it, I mayhave to go to Iraq for the next one.
"Because of the clouds, most wereunable to see the stages of the eclipse until it got totally dark.
In theBay Area, though, mostly sunny skies made eclipse watching a treat, exceptalong the coast, where it was obscured by fog.
Parks, parking lots,shopping centers, back yards and planetariums became Eclipsefests as the peakapproached.
More than a hundred sun gazers showed up at the Branham LanePark in south San Jose with almost as many gizmos to help them spot sunspotsand watch the moon cross the sun.
There were funny Mylar glasses, bigpinhole cameras, small pinhole cameras, welder's glass, welder's masks,binoculars projecting images onto cardboard and telescopes.
"Atthe
Children's Discovery Museum in downtown San Jose, hundreds of youngstersand adults made cardboard telescopes, which projected the eclipse on whitecards through a needle hole opening.
Paul Stonecipher , a discovery museumstaff guide, said, "We wanted to make little theaters for all of the kids tosee the eclipse without burning their eyes.
"Using mirrors, the eclipsealso was projected on the exterior walls of the lavendar-colored museum.
Eclipse theme parkFor nearly a week now, Hawaii turned into an eclipsetheme park.
More than 500 astronomers and tens of thousands of amateursflocked to the islands to sell nearly everything under the sun.
There was even an eclipse haircut and, of course, an eclipsedrink at the Eclipse restaurant in Kailua-Kona.
