That is the vexing question facing Mr LewisPreston, the former chairman of J P Morgan, the New York bank, who takesover as president of the World Bank this September.
As bankers and finance ministers gathered in Washington this weekend for thespring meetings of the bank and International Monetary Fund, there was noshortage of advice.
The US Treasury wants the bank to bypass the governmentsof developing countries and lend sizeable sums directly to the privatesector.
The bank is also under pressure to follow the example of Mr JacquesAttali's European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and attachstrict political conditions to its loans.
Development economists, meanwhile,are urging the bank to respect the rhetoric of last year's World DevelopmentReport and focus more on poverty alleviation.
Few in Washington now doubt that the bankis needed: new imperatives, such as reconstruction in eastern Europe and theMiddle East, have merely been superimposed on older, unsolved problems:Grinding poverty is a near universal condition in much of the world: 1bnpeople live on less than Dollars 1 a day.
It is not an impressive bureaucracy,' saysMr John Williamson, a senior fellow at the Institute for InternationalEconomics. '
The morale of staff is lousy,' says Mr Charles Flickner, asenior analyst on the Senate Budget Committee and close observer of thebank.
Although nowwell-liked (partly for championing causes such as women's rights in theThird World), many observers say he never fully recovered from a rocky startinvolving a divisive internal reorganisation of the bank.
Mr Percy Mistry, a scholar at Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford, and formersenior adviser at the bank, says it suffered from 'presidential failure'during the 1980s.
Mr Robert McNamara, a forceful chief executive in the1970s, built a presidential institution that responded to firm leadershipfrom the top.
But neither Mr Conable nor his predecessor, Mr A W 'Tom'Clausen, a commercial banker, could fill his shoes.
For a decade the bankhas effectively been run by two senior - and strong-willed -vice-presidents: Mr Ernest Stern (who nearly left last year to join theEBRD) and Mr Moeen Qureshi.
Mr Preston's first challenge, says Mr Mistry, will be to wrest control ofthe bank from Messrs Stern and Qureshi; his second, to prune legions of'useless advisers' and install managers with real-world experience.
Histhird, one might add, will be quickly to establish his independence from theUS Treasury which always browbeats a newcomer.
In spite of recentprogress in a few countries, such as Mexico, the past decade has been one ofrelative failure.
Many optimists see the debt reduction strategy launched by MrNicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary, in 1989, as a 'final solution' tothe debt crisis.
'The Brady plan is enough,' says Mr Williamson, if developing countries arewilling to embrace reform and if it is matched by greater forgiveness ofofficial debt.
Officials such as Mr David Mulford of the US Treasury say therecent forgiveness of about half of Poland's official debt will not set aprecedent for other debtors.
In the long run it willbe impossible to isolate Poland,' he says.
Theresult of delay and compound interest is a total debt burden today of someDollars 1,341bn compared with a relatively manageable Dollars 639bn in 1980.
'The bank failed to take a timely leadership position on the debt crisis,'concludes Mr Richard Feinberg, director of the Overseas Development Councilin Washington.
)As incoming president, Mr Preston must review the bank's strategies forpromoting development.
Professor John Toye, director ofthe Institute for Development Studies at Sussex University, recentlycompleted an exhaustive analysis of bank programmes.
He concludes (as dointernal bank analyses) that policy-based lending has 'achieved something,particularly in relation to the external account, but not nearly as much asthe bank and donor community hoped'.
On average programmes have reducedbalance of payments gaps, had a negligible impact on Gross National Productand led to falls in the ratio of investment to GNP.Mr Feinberg calls the decline in investment the 'great shortcoming ofstructural adjustment lending in the 1980s'.
(Investment to GNP ratios havefallen markedly in Africa, the Middle East and Latin America.)
The maturing of bank programmesand the failure to expand lending much in the 1980s has led to a markedshrinkage in its net transfers to developing countries.
According to MrLawrence Summers, the bank's chief economist, net transfers over the nextfive years will be about Dollars 2 per person in the developing worldcompared with Dollars 9 (in current prices) in the late 1970s.
Some analysts, including US Treasury officials, believe lacklustreperformance in much of the Third World reflects the inefficiency (andsometimes corruption) of governments.
The EBRD's constitution requiresborrowers to be 'committed to and applying the principles of multi-partydemocracy, pluralism and market economics'.
It also says 60 per cent of EBRDresources must be devoted to the commercial sector - private businesses andstate concerns in the process of privatisation.
The World Bank operatesunder very different rules: its charter requires it to be non-political andonly its small affiliate, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), canmake direct loans to private businesses.
Such valuesare alien in many developing countries, but that does not imply they shouldbe denied the means for economic development.
If strict politicalconditionality had been imposed in the past, the bank could not have lent toa development star such as South Korea.
Mr Flicknerof the Senate Budget Committee says the issue is not whether to insist onWestminster-style democracy but whether the form of governance is such that'loans will benefit the majority of the people'.
Bank officials say greaterattention will be paid to issues such as the rule of law and transparency ofdecision-taking.
Mr Conable, to his credit, is resisting the US Treasury's pressure.
He says the bank's main aim is to combat poverty and that it will seek a'balanced relationship between government and the market' in developingcountries.
In reality, much of the most badly-needed investment is inspheres such as infrastructure, health care and education where governmentsplay a dominant role even in industrialised countries.
Indeed, one conclusion of Prof Toye's analysis is that policy-based loanswould have a greater chance of success if they included measures to expandthe role of the state in poorer countries alongside measures to promoteeconomic liberalisation.
Sir William Ryrie, the head of the IFC, says the objective of a large volumeof public lending to the private sector is wrong-headed. '
Advocates of a switch to direct support of the private sectorare surely not arguing for public subsidies for Third World entrepreneurs;but if subsidies are ruled out, why should the bank's judgment of marketrisk be more reliable than that of private lenders in the west?There are alternative recipes for fostering faster Third World development.
The bank'sown research department is highlighting the need to relieve poverty directlyand to improve fundamentals, such as education, nutrition and health care.
'Liberalisation matters,' says Mr Williamson at the Institute forInternational Economics, 'but education is more important.'
He argues thatthe best way of stimulating growth and improving income distribution is toput resources into education and primary health care.
Mr Feinberg at theOverseas Development Council broadly agrees: the bank has got to find a wayof 'melding equity and efficiency as it promotes development'.The challenge for Mr Preston is clear: put the sterile ideological battlesof the 1980s behind the bank and develop policies that put greater emphasison the formation of human capital.
Mr Summers, the bank's economist, says pessimistically that becausedevelopment money will be in short supply over the next decade, the bank andother donors will have to concentrate on exporting ideas.
Rather than tamelyaccepting the status quo, Mr Preston could use his platform to promote amore constructive attitude in rich countries.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
FALLS IN INVESTMENT -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Domestic investment as % of GNP                                  1975-82         1983-90All developing countries            26.7            23.6Africa                              26.4            19.4Middle East
26.3            23.4Latin America &amp; Caribbean           23.3            18.3Asia                                27.9            28.9 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source:
IMF ----------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------            WORLD BANK DISBURSEMENTS -----------------------------------------------------------------------
By region (Fiscal 1990)Billion dollars          Gross           NetSub-Sahara Africa
2.70           1.98Asia                      6.27
3.72Europe
, Middle East andN Africa
2.57           0.39Latin America &amp; Caribbean 6.16           3.25 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source: World Bank -----------------------------------------------------------------------
