Introduction:
Rumbling spring thunderstorms have announced thebeginning of the unofficial tornado season that runs from Aprilthrough June across Texas and other Tornado Alley states in thenation's heartland.
From 1951 through 1986, there have been an average of 118tornadoes in Texas per year, according to the state climatologist'soffice in College Station.
In April and June an average of 18 to 19 tornadoesoccur each month, but in May, when weather conditions are the mostunstable, that average increases to about 36.
Ifthey wait until it gets there, it's going to be too late,'' saidBuddy McIntyre, a forecaster with the National Weather Service.
Last May 22, a killer storm flattened the small West Texas townof Saragosa, killing 30 people and injuring 162.
In mid-November,11 people died in East Texas when a series of tornadoes trashedtowns from Cherokee County to the Gulf Coast.
But there are some things you can do to protect yourselfand property,'' said Laureen Chernow, a spokeswoman for thegovernor's division of emergency management.
A watch means weather conditions are suitable for development ofa tornado, and people should keep a careful lookout for potentialfunnel clouds.
Take cover immediately and don't go outside, but if youare in a car or mobile home
you will be safer taking cover in thenearest ditch or depression.
McIntyre noted that most fatalities in a tornado are from flyingdebris, so ``we tell people to squat down, cover their heads andpresent a low profile.''
James R. McDonald, director of the Institute for DisasterResearch at Texas Tech University, says many people mistakenly tryto outrun tornadoes in their cars.
During the 1979 Wichita Falls tornado that killed 53, McDonaldsaid, ``people jumped in their cars and drove down Main Street at90 mph.''
It was oncebelieved that windows needed to be open to equalize air pressurebetween the storm and the inside of a house to prevent the housefrom exploding.
McIntyre said there are enough natural openings in a house toequalize air pressure, and ``if that tornado wants to open yourwindows, it'll do that for you.
