Introduction:LIMA --
On June 4, I was among a group of journalists whowere told that the war against the Shining Path ("SenderoLuminoso") guerrillas had almost been won.
We had beenallowed into a "safe house" that, according to InteriorMinister Agustin Mantilla, had been used as headquarters bythe leaders of the Marxist guerrilla movement.
This was the undergroundorganization's central nervous system, commentedinvestigative Police Chief Fernando Reyes Roca, a short manwho is a consummate bureaucratic survivor.
Alas, as it turned out this was not the rebelorganization's headquarters, nor its central nervous system,but more of an archive and memorabilia repository.
Nevertheless, it was a very important and unexpected policecoup against the Shining Path -- one that probably could havebrought dramatic results if President Alan Garcia had notdecided to make public the operation so soon after the firstpolice intervention, in order to score a quick propagandagain.
This impulsiveness gave full warning to the guerrillas'entire clandestine apparatus, allowing them to limitconsiderably the damage inflicted on them.
As Alberto Fujimori prepares to take over as Peru's nextpresident on July 28, the question of whether the ShiningPath will hound his administration as it has the previous tworanks high among his concerns.
The Shining Path went to war in 1980, on the same day Peruwas holding general elections after 12 years of a militarydictatorship.
Its first actions were cautious, modest andoften ludicrous in a crazy way (like hanging dogs fromlampposts, with scribbled insults over them to ChineseCommunist martyrs).
While President Fernando Belaunde's regime did what itcould to maintain democratic legality at first, it was quiteunprepared to deal with any insurgency -- especially with onethat had been meticulously planned and organized severalyears before the first shot was fired.
In October 1981, emergency laws were imposed for the firsttime on part of Peru; they covered only 2% of the population.
If the armed forces have been rightly accused ofsystematic violations of human rights (Peru ranks as one ofthe world's worst human-rights offenders), the militaryfaults the civilian authorities for failing to providemuch-needed leadership.
Mr. Belaunde (the first to deal withthe problem), who tried to ignore the insurgency out ofexistence, is regarded as a well-meaning but inept leader.
In the first weeks of his mandate, he made several rightmoves -- like emphasizing his role as commander in chief ofthe armed forces and reorganizing the corruption-riddenpolice.
At first, hetried a liberal approach, looking for a dialogue with thefanatical Shining Path, and sending scores of youngprofessionals to the emergency areas to attack what he saidwere the "root causes" of the insurgency.
But dialogue wasdisdainfully rejected: Dozens of these professionals wereassassinated, and the armed forces slowed down their actions,while the rebels made largely unimpeded progress.
Andfor the first time, death squads -- linked by some analyststo Mr. Garcia's APRA Party -- began to contribute to thekilling.
Midpoint during his term, Mr. Garcia lost all hopeof defeating the Shining Path, and decided just to coexistwith it, says Rafael Merino, a respected analyst on securitymatters.
Not even in that was Mr. Garcia successful, as violenceclimbed steadily during the second half of his term.
In 1988,1,986 people were killed as a result of insurgent orcounterinsurgent actions; in 1989, 3,198 were killed; and1,730 during the first six months of 1990.How well is Mr. Fujimori expected to deal with theinsurgency?
According toFrancisco Loayza, Mr. Fujimori's adviser on internal-securitymatters, military actions against the Shining Path should besubordinated to economic-development initiatives.
He alsofeels that the Shining Path is weakened, and that animportant Shining Path faction would be willing to engage inpeace talks.
This is only wishful thinking, according to Mr. Merino:"If President Fujimori thinks he'll finish the war throughthose `pacification' policies, it will be like riding intobattle with no better dress or weapons than a tuxedo.
At least, that's what seems isgoing to happen with the economy, where the vote-gettingpopulist message appears in the process of being replaced bya far more orthodox approach.
Free-market economist Hernandode Soto, who has been advising Mr. Fujimori during the pastmonth, thinks that might be the case. "
Running against all majortrends of contemporary history, the insurgents have followedShining Path founder Abimael Guzman with the commitment thatthe faithful reserve for their prophet.
It looked, said aPeruvian journalist, like the seed for the future "Museum ofthe Revolution" -- wood carvings; woven baskets; tapestries;paintings; chiseled stone; all meticulously, lovingly craftedwith the mythified motifs of the internal war.
There werealso the hagiographic representations of Mr. Guzman himself,in the various postures that endeavored to combine the heroicwith the intellectual.
