Introduction:IN VIRGINIA the North American Free Trade Agreement evokes a passionateopposition, but football, apparently, still is the reigning obsession.
A 'not this Nafta' rally on Saturday provided little competition for thecollege 'game of the century' - Florida State University against Notre Dame.
Only 115 demonstrators turned out amid the autumn foliage in the grounds ofVirginia's capitol in Richmond.
Theorganisers said they were sending a message to Virginia's three waveringcongressmen that a 'yes' vote on Nafta in the House on Wednesday would be'remembered in November'.
That is, next November's mid-term elections, whenthose assembled - mostly followers of Texas billionaires of Mr Ross Perotand union members - would unite to throw the rascals out of office.
'We are absolutely for free trade,' says Mr Bill Diggitt, the state directorof
Mr Perot's United We Stand. '
Itputs decision-making in the hands of international panels, which underminesour judicial system.'
He says he is concerned about the loss of Virginia'stax base as companies move production to Mexico and place continuousdownward pressure on wages.
In Virginia there wasslavery, but the slaves were expensive and the people who owned them valuedthem.
He is trying to sort through the misleading information,' sayshis press secretary.
As a member of the House armed services committee heexpects the foreign policy implications of the Nafta vote to weigh heavilyin his decision.
Mr Ralph Dombrower,a Perot devotee, brought the results of an interactive computer poll showinga growing isolationism among American voters.
'The public is becoming less inclined to see the US as arbiter of worldwidehuman behaviour and wishes to get out of our foreign policy involvements,'he says.
We were going against a tide ofmisinformation,' says Ms Kathy Otts, co-captain of Virginians
For Nafta.
The coalition - 100 of the state's largest businesses and 500 small andmedium-sized companies - counter-attacked with an 'education' campaign.
The anti-Nafta forces on Saturday published long lists of businesscontributors to the pro-Nafta congressmen. '
Constituents only have votes togive, and it seems these congressmen are having a hard time hearing theirmessage,' the cover page said.
On Friday, after the fifth pro-Nafta congressman announced his position, adispirited Lorrie Beckwith, an opposition organiser, said her campaign hadbeen hindered early on by a lack of unity.
Another was said to have received assurances of funding for a newaircraft carrier to be built in his district.
'In Portsmouth, Virginia, one of the last undecided congressmen, OwenPickett, is in his district office, as he is every weekend.
His door bears asign, 'This office belongs to the people of the second district ofVirginia'.The unionised port workers are urging opposition.
The military, whichcomprises most of the district's voters, are worried about jobs in the faceof Pentagon cutbacks. '
