Introduction:
DAMAGE CAUSED by Hurricane Andrew could rise to Dollars 20bn, it wasestimated yesterday, as one of the costliest US storms this centurythreatened a further devastating landfall near the city of New Orleans.
The hurricane tore through southern Florida early on Monday morning, causingbillions of dollars of property damage and at least 12 deaths, and yesterdaywas moving north-west across the Gulf of Mexico with winds of about 140miles an hour.
Ms Kate Hale, director of emergency services in Florida's Dade County, whichbore the brunt of the storm, estimated that Andrew had already causedDollars 15bn to Dollars 20bn (Pounds 7.5bn-Pounds 10bn) of damage.
The US industry's Property Claims Service, theofficial compiler of disaster losses, had yet to compile a preliminary tallyof the Florida bill.
Several forecasting agencies suggested the likeliest landfall was in centralLouisiana, to the west of New Orleans, possibly late last night or thismorning.
New Orleans, with a population of 1.6m, is particularly vulnerable becausethe city lies below sea level, has the Mississippi River running through itscentre and a large lake immediately to the north.
In Florida, Andrew caused greatest havoc in a largely suburban swathe some10-15 miles south of Miami.
The town of Homestead, near the centre of thestorm, was largely flattened, including a local air force base.
The brunt of insurance claims from the Florida storm will fall on the USindustry, and companies with a heavy local exposure include the State FarmGroup and the Allstate Insurance unit of Sears Roebuck.
These are also theleading property/casualty and home insurance groups in Louisiana, togetherwith American International Group.
According to Balcombe Group, a UK-based claims adjustment firm, otherinsurers with large exposure in the hurricane-hit area are HartfordInsurance, Aetna and Travellers.
About 12per cent of Travellers' home insurance premium income came from Florida lastyear, and 4.6 per cent of its commercial insurance premiums.
The last serious US hurricane, Hugo, which struck South Carolina in 1989,cost the industry Dollars 4.2bn from insured losses, though estimates of thetotal damage caused ranged between Dollars 6bn and Dollars 10bn.
