Introduction:
Rescuers crawled through collapsed homesand shops today looking for more victims of a tornado that carved a3-mile stretch of destruction, killing 17 people, injuring 463 andleaving 1,000 homeless.
``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in ablender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker BobCaraway, whose specialty is cave rescues.
In Huntsville, teams with cranes and floodlights searched forthe injured or dead, hampered by wind-whipped rain and temperaturesthat plummeted overnight from 73 degrees into the 30s.
His spokesman, Terry Abbott, said aerialsurveys indicate the twister hopped along a 25-mile path, much ofit straight through Huntsville.
By this afternoon, severe thunderstorms were crossing theNortheast.
The National Weather Service put out a tornado watch forparts of Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York,all of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and parts of Massachusetts,Vermont and New Hampshire.
In Pennsylvania, the weather service said it receivedunconfirmed reports of a tornado that turned over a car and knockeddown trees and power lines near Gettysburg.
Elsewhere:   _
In Georgia, 19 people were injured, four critically, and atleast 200 people were evacuated after a tornado strus.
C., and a tornadotoppled trees, downedpower lines and damaged 20 houses near Greenwood, S.C.
No injurieswere reported in either state.
_
In West Virginia, high winds believed to be tornadoes sweptJefferson County early today, overturning trailers, blowing roofsoff homes and downing power lines, authorities said.
_
Heavy thunderstorms destroyed at least a dozen homes inAlorton, Ill., killing one person and injuring 20 others, fiveseriously, authorities said.
In a matter of seconds, cars were hurledthrough the air and crushed, and apartments and stores looked as ifthey had been bombed.
The National Weather Service had issued a tornado watch earlierin the day, but did not issue a more urgent tornado warning until4:39 p.m. CST, when the tornado was spotted at the municipal golfcourse.
Huntsville Police Maj.
Robert Moder said this morning that 463people were injured by the twister, which plowed through a schooland rural areas as well as a shopping mall and adjacent apartments.
Police Chief Richard Ottman initially put the number of dead at19, but his clerk, Kitty Whitworth, later said the death toll waslowered to 17 after police confirmed the count of bodies.
No children in the school were killed, but about 30 youngsterswere in a kindergarten class at the building, and five werereported injured.
Most of the dead were in apartments, stores orcars.
Mayor Steve Hettinger estimated the number of homeless at 1,000and said officials were preparing a request for federal disasterassistance.
A worker at a building owned by the Madison County Jaycees said42
people were staying there early today, and described the mood ofthe survivors as ``shock, mostly, and disbelief.''
``They're thankful to be alive and they're thankful theirfamilies are alive,'' he said, adding that the shelter had receivedcalls from around the country from worried relatives.
The tornado was Alabama's deadliest since a 1975 twister killed22 people in Birmingham, said Danny Cooper, state emergencymanagement director in Montgomery.
Along a highway near a destroyed apartment complex, cars wereflipped and smashed into telephone poles and crushed by trees.
``It came in with a huge roar, an enormous amount of water, andit just started shaking and tearing at everything it could get holdof,'' said real estate broker Ike Carroll, who was in his car.
``All of these heavyarcing, flashing lines that were just popping and snapping over thetop of us.
It was as if you were looking into an arc-welder,they were so bright.''
Kenneth Lenhard had undergone an operation at the CrestwoodHospital on Wednesday and returned to his room about an hour beforea window in the next room blew out as the tornado passed.
``There wasn't anything I could do, so I covered my head,''Lenhard said.
The downtown Jones Valley Elementary School, the WaterfordSquare and adjacent Queensbury apartment complexes were reduced torubble.
The city is home to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and theArmy's Redstone Arsenal, but no serious damage was reported fromthe space agency or weapons testing center.
At least two other tornadoes were reported in Alabama, injuringat least three people in addition to the Huntsville total.
Near Palmetto, Ga.,
resident Jeff Bryant said his home at theSweetbriar Mobile Home Park near Interstate 85 began to vibratewhen the twister approached.
``Then we heard a large, loud, swirling and humming noise,'' herecalled.
Thomas Farr was driving on Interstate 85 when the tornado hit.``It was picking up cars and tossing them like toys off theinterstate,'' he said.
The car infront of us was flipped about 100 yards, and the guy was thrown outof his passenger window and landed 50 feet from his car.
