The plane, normally equipped to carry nuclear bombs, crashedabout 1:15 a.m., said Lt. Naomi Siegal, a spokeswoman at theStrategic Air Command installation.
The crew was practicing landings after a seven-hour trainingflight when it crashed during one of its touch-and-go approaches,Peck said.
During such maneuvers, landing gears touch the ground butthe plane doesn't land.
All three sections of the plane burned on impact, said SeniorAirman Tim Sanders, a base spokesman.
The crew members crawled orwere helped out of the front section of the aircraft, he said.
Members of the crew suffered broken bones, but no one was burned,said Capt.
Senior Airman Tim Sanders, another base spokesman, said thoseaboard were Capt.
Mark Hartney, 29, an aircraft commander fromMulberry, Fla.;
1st Lt.
Michael S. Debruzzi, 26, a pilot from NewBrighton, Minn.; Capt.
Anthony D. Phillips, 28, a radar navigatorfrom Folkston, Ga.; 1st
Lt.
James W. Herrmann, 30, a navigator fromSharpsville, Pa.;
1st Lt.
Daniel McCarrick, 25, an electronicwarfare officer from Succasunna, N.J.; Airman 1st Class, Joseph A.Vallie, 20, a gunner from Stephenson, Mich.; Maj.
William R.Kroeger, 52, an instructor pilot from Fountain Hills, Ariz.; and 1stLt.
Ann Parent, a spokeswoman for Marquette General Hospital, saidHartney and Debruzzi were in fair condition, Phillips and Valliewere in stable condition, McCarrick was in satisfactory conditionand Kroeger was in serious condition.
Herrmann and Smith were listed in stable condition at the basehospital, said Technical Sgt.
Hartney was the aircraft commander, but Debruzzi also wasqualified to fly the plane, Bailey said.
``You can putparts of a plane back together, but you cannot put people backtogether.''
The accident was classified as the most serious kind, and allaircraft exercises at Sawyer were canceled even though runways otherthan the one where the crash occurred remained open, Bailey said.
Peck said a board of officers will investigate the accident,adding weather did not appear to be a factor in the crash.
``Crews have to be trained to fly at any time of the day or nightin any weather,'' he said.
The eight-engine B-52, which was deployed in the early 1950s, isthe military's biggest bomber, with a wingspan of 185 feet and amaximum takeoff weight of 488,000 pounds.
In other accidents involving B-52s, a bomber was damaged when apilot aborted a takeoff and overshot a runway at Castle Air ForceBase in central California on Feb. 11.
A B-52 bomber with radar problems crashed in Arizona'a MonumentValley in October 1984, killing two crew members, after its wingsclipped a mesa.
The Air Force has had more trouble recently with the B-52'ssuccessor, the B-1B bomber.
Although smaller than the B-52, the B-1Bcan fly at supersonic speeds and carry more bombs.
Four B-1Bs have crashed in the four years the plane has beenflying, including two nine days apart in November.
One of the $280million B-1Bs was destroyed after smashing onto a runway atEllsworth Air Force Base, S.D., during a training flight on Nov. 17.On Nov. 8, a B-1B crashed and burned in a field near Dyess Air ForceBase, Texas.
