Introduction:   Two days of racially charged hearings on policebrutality and a report detailing widespread segregation in thenation's third-largest city show the new mayor must still heal someold wounds.
Richard M. Daley was elected mayor April 4 amid fears by blackactivists that he would bring back the machine politics of his latefather, Richard J. Daley, who was mayor for more than 20 yearsbefore his death in 1976.
The younger Daley emphasized empowerment of minorities in hisspring campaign, and after defeating black challengers in theprimary and general election, he named minorities to 11 of his 21Cabinet positions.
The racial issue resurfaced last week in two days of specialhearings called by a City Council committee to look intoallegations of police brutality against blacks.
``There's been no demonstrable change on the part of whiteleadership in this city to end racism,'' said Bob Starks, associateprofessor of inner city studies at Northeastern IllinoisUniversity.
But Daley maintains that what's getting worse is ``irresponsiblepolitical rhetoric'' from black politicians who are looking aheadto the 1991 mayoral election.
Daley is filling the remaining twoyears of the term of the late Harold Washington, the city's firstblack mayor who was just a few months into his second term when hedied in November 1987.
``I will not ever tolerate police brutality, bias or bigotry inthe city of Chicago,'' Daley said.
Also last week, a human relations task force made up of businessand civic leaders released a report saying racism in Chicago wasfueled by ``a shocking lack of contact'' between the city's ethnicgroups.
The report, based on a 15-month investigation of the city's racerelations, concluded that racial divisions ``threaten to makeChicago an increasingly unpleasant place to live and areantithetical to the city's economic growth and prosperity.''
At the City Council hearings Thursday and Friday, blacks whoalleged they were the victims of police brutality accused officers
_ most of them white _ of unprovoked beatings, false arrests,intimidation and insulting them with racial slurs.
Among them was a 55-year-old grandmother, Callie Bryant, whotestified that she and her daughter were beaten up in 1987 by sevenwhite police officers who gave her ``the sign of the Ku Klux Klan.''
Two teen-age boys testified that in August they were picked upby white officers, roughed up, and then dropped off in a whiteneighborhood where they were attacked by white youths.
The poice department's record was defended by PoliceSuperintendent LeRoy Martin, a black appointee of Washington.
``I'm the head of this police department, and if this policedepartment is bad, it's because I'm bad as superintendent,'' Martinsaid.
