Introduction:
House Speaker Tom Foley charges that most of the supportfor the term limit proposal in Washington state came from"extreme right-wing activists."
Ron Brown, chairman of theDemocratic National Committee, says "term limits are abackhanded attempt by Republicans to get rid of Democratsthey can't defeat at the polls."
While it's true themost visible term limit advocates are right of center, themovement is picking up many prominent liberal and Democraticsupporters.
Certainly the polls show that term limits areoverwhelmingly popular with Americans regardless of income,party, race or sex.
Those earning less than $20,000 a year supportedterm limits by 77% to 16%.
Martin Plissner, political director for CBS News, sayshe has "never seen an issue on which there was so littledemographic variation.
"One reason is that term limits would open up politics tomany people now excluded from office by career incumbents.
Most ofthe authors of Washington state's term limit are liberalDemocrats who want to break up "the old-boy network."
One ofthe authors, Sherry Bockwinkel, says "You won't see whiteincumbents hanging on to districts that long ago becamelargely minority.
""Incumbency is the glass ceiling of American politics,"says Kay Slaughter, the Democratic candidate in a specialU.S.
Shirley Chisholm, who in 1972 was the first black to runfor a majorparty presidential nomination, says "longtermincumbency is a big reason that Congress no longer works andisn't representative.
Ben Nighthorse Campbell, the only American Indian inCongress, backed a term limit measure last year thatrestricted his own tenure.
Term limits for Congress have been supported by some ofhistory's most prominent Democrats.
Today, former California Governor Jerry Brown saysadvocacy of term limits is a key element in his populistpresidential campaign against a "constipated" politicalsystem. "
Term limits are a castor oil that democracy needs totake," he says.
Last year, as head of the CaliforniaDemocratic Party he refused to sign a party slate maileragainst term limits.
Brown says arguments that legislative staff and theunelected bureaucracy would gain power under term limits aresimply proof that "we must curb the excessive power of thosepolitical players as well."
He notes both groups opposed termlimits in his home state; the California initiative includedbudget cuts that retired more than 700 legislative staffers.
Other former Democratic governors who favor term limitsinclude Vermont's Madeleine Kunin and Colorado's RichardLamm.
"Breaking the gridlock of incumbency could throw the doorsopen to new people and new ideas that would make politicsrewarding, meaningful and fun," says Ms. Kunin.
"While many prominent Democrats support term limits, party"apparatchiks" are dead set against them.
The DemocraticCongressional Campaign Committee has quietly put out the wordthat it will blacklist political consultants who advisecandidates to back term limits and has told pollsters not toask term-limit questions.
Intimidation like that has slowed support for term limitsamong Democratic officeholders, but there are exceptions.
InMassachusetts, the state's Democratic attorney general andsecretary of state both favor term limits.
Amongthose who have, and who will never be accused of beingcard-carrying Republicans, are: Washington Post columnistRichard Cohen, syndicated columnist Richard Reeves, theNational Journal's Neal Peirce and Time magazine's MichaelKramer.
Hendrik Hertzberg, a former speechwriter for Jimmy Carterwho edited the New Republic until last month, agrees termlimits would mean a loss of some distinguished legislators.
However, he concludes "it would be a cost worth paying to berid of the much larger number of time-servers who havelearned nothing from longevity in office except cynicism,complacency and a sense of diminished possibility."
"Such recent body-blows to Congress as Kitegate and theClarence Thomas hearings have convinced some liberal mediaoutlets to reevaluate term limits.
The liberal Seattle Times,Washington state's largest newspaper, stunned its readers byendorsing term limits.
In April, it denounced term limits as "thelatest anti-government fad to sweep the country."
Last month,the station made a highly unusual about-face and endorsedterm limits for Congress: "We're not going to get{leadership} till we have a massive infusion of new blood.
"Among Democratic Party activists, James Calaway of Texasis typical of those who now favor term limits.
He says termlimits would mean "we're governed by citizens who go homeafter their service and not permanent, elitist people whonever leave office."
Other Texas Democrats who have joinedhim include Frances "Sissy" Farenthold, who cochaired GeorgeMcGovern's 1972 national campaign, and Leonel Castillo, JimmyCarter's director of the Immigration and NaturalizationService.
Neo-liberals, who believe that centralized bureaucraciesare the biggest obstacle to reforming government, are alsowarming to term limits.
David Osborne, who became sort of aguru for neo-liberals with his book "Laboratories ofDemocracy," speaks for many reform-minded liberals when hesays, "Term limits are necessary to shake things up anddisrupt the careerist mindset that leads to so much cowardicein elected officials.
"While Speaker Tom Foley reacts to term limits the way thatLinus in the comic strip "Peanuts" would if his securityblanket were taken away, some House Democrats think hisconcern that term limits would result in large GOP gains inCongress is a fantasy.
"People who say term limits are aRepublican plot to oust incumbents should know that amajority of open seats are won by Democrats," says Rep. AndyJacobs of Indiana.
Indeed, the Democratic Party couldactually be helped by term limits, according to formerOklahoma state legislator Cleta Mitchell, a self-described"liberal feminist" who works with the Denver-based term limitgroup Americans Back in Charge.
"No one suggests the drive to enact term limits will beeasy -- especially in states that ban voter initiatives.
Butthere are already signs that business lobbies, labor unionsand other term limit opponents are relying more on convincingjudges -- starting with Florida's heavily politicized stateSupreme Court -- to overturn state term limits than on tryingto convince voters to reject the idea.
The leading anti-termlimit group, Let the People Decide, has closed itsWashington, D.C., offices and been reduced to a skeletonstaff.
