Introduction:
The earthquake that killed 25,000 people inArmenia pushed last year's earthquake-related death toll worldwideto the highest level since 1976, when a Chinese earthquake killed atleast 10 times as many, the U.S. Geological Survey reports.
The estimated earthquake death toll in 1988 includes anadditional 2,000 or more people who died in other earthquakes aroundthe world, the Survey reported Monday.
Although the annual average death toll for earthquakes is about10,000, in 1987 only 1,100 lives were lost.
In addition to the deaths, some 13,000 people were injured andmore than a half-million were left homeless in the Armenianearthquake, which had a magnitude of 6.8 on the Richter scale.
The main shock was followed within minutes by a second, measuring5.8 on the Richter scale, which estimates the energy released by anearthquake.
An earthquake of 5.0 can cause considerable damage, andthe strength rises by 10 times for each whole number on the scale.
Many of the deaths in Armenia were blamed on collapsingbuildings, as the earthquake rattled concrete structures until theyfell to the ground, according to subsequent analyses.
That one occurred inJanuary, however, and so does not count in the 1988 toll.
Last year's second most deadly earthquake occurred Aug. 20 on theNepal-India border, killing 1,000.
That earthquake, measuring 6.6 onthe Richter scale, destroyed thousands of homes and injured manypeople.
On Nov. 6 an earthquake measuring 7.3 on the scale claimed 730lives and injured about 4,000 people on the border between Burma andChina, the Geological Survey reported.
Three significant earthquakes were recorded in the United Stateslast year, including the strongest shock of the year.
Thatearthquake, measured at 7.6, occurred March 6 in the Gulf of Alaskaand resulted in only minor damage.
The only U.S. earthquake death last year occured when someonesuffered a heart attack after an earthquake measuring 4.8 inWhittier, Calif., in February.
An earthquake centered in eastern Canada on Nov. 25 was feltwidely across that country and in the northeastern United States asfar south as Washington, the Survey reported.
Injuries were also reported from two offshore earthquakes, one inthe Ionian Sea near Greece Oct. 16 and another near the AzoresIslands Nov. 21.
And Japan, usually very seismically active, recorded only onesignificant earthquake last year, the Survey reported.
