Introduction:
A tornado blasted through this NorthFlorida town before dawn today, destroying several homes and acollege library, blowing off rooftops, flipping cars and leavingfour people dead and 15 injured, officials said.
The tornado touched down at 4:30 a.m. just west of Madison,about 50 miles east of Tallahassee, and cut a 12-mile swath ofdestruction, authorities said.
``There was this huge roar and then I heard a tree crack outthere and thought we were all gone,'' said Marie Prince, a MadisonCounty sheriff's dispatcher.
Fifteen people were injured, but none of the injuries was critical,according to Madison County Memorial Hospital administrator JeannieBaker.
A house-to-house search found no more bodies, but a man and ababy had to be freed from separate homes where they were trapped,Peavy said.
Two of the deaths occurred in mobile homes blown apart by thetornado, and four other houses were seriously damaged as well, saidMadison County Civil Defense Director Bernard Wilson.
You'd never knowthere was a trailer here,'' said Dorothy Butler, sister of one ofthe victims.
Rescue units from adjoining counties were helping out, alongwith state law enforcement and forestry officials.
The tornado was part of a storm system that struck across theSoutheast with high winds, lightning and hail.
Trees, roofs andmobile homes were damaged, and at least six other injuries werereported.
Madison, a town of about 3,500 people, is the county seat ofMadison County, a thinly populated tobacco growing area of pineywoods, rolling hills and swamps on the border with Georgia.
The twister's destructive path started in front of a shoppingcenter and then proceeded straight into North Florida JuniorCollege, where it ``totaled the new library and took the roof offthe auditorium,'' Peavy said.
The twister blew away several homes, blew the roof off a nearbychurch, overturned cars and knocked down trees, Peavy said.
As far as his office knew, all the damage was from one tornado,Peavy said.
Two tornadoes struck near the towns of Malone and Bascom, about100 miles to the west of Madison, said Jackson County emergencymanagement director John Mader.
Three homes and a trailer were destroyed and five homesseriously damaged, he said, and two people were slightly injured.
Many county roads were blocked by fallen trees, he said, andofficials were surveying the area by helicopter.
Hail the size of golf balls and damagingwinds hit Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and Georgia.
More than one inch of rain fell in one hour this morning inWaycross, Ga., 70 miles northeast of here, and wind gusts of 40 mphwere reported in Valdosta, according to the National WeatherService.
Elsewhere in Georgia, trees and power lines were reported blowndown, a barn was reported destroyed and a tin roof was blown off anold building.
The winds destroyed up to nine mobile homes west of Bainbridge,Ga., Monday night, injuring three people, one seriously.
In the eastern Georgia's Bulloch County, six mobile homes andone house were heavily damaged shortly after dawn today, but noinjuries were reported, the weather service said.
Madison County has been hit by seven tornadoes since 1959 withonly one injury reported, according to the National Weather Service.
