Introduction:
A major issue hanging over the 1990 Census isresolved with the decision to include military personnel stationedoverseas, but Congress is arguing over whether to keep countingillegal aliens.
Censusfigures are used to redistribute the 435 House seats among thestates every 10 years and to distribute federal aid to localgovernments.
Most of these states are in the North, where growthhas lagged behind that of the South and West.
Undocumented aliens are largely concentrated in the South, Westand industrial states like New York, and other states fear a lossof power to those areas if the aliens are counted.
That has yet to be decided, but possibilitiesinclude counting the state where the person owns a home or the laststate where he or she lived for at least six months.
Rep. Tom Ridge, R-Pa., unsuccessfully sought to attach a ban oncounting aliens to an appropriations measure providing $5.8 millionto run the State, Justice and Commerce departments next year,including $800 million to take the census.
``Every census since the Constitution was created has countedall residents of the states, both citizens and non-citizens,''observed Rep. Don Edwards, D-Calif.
``Congress is empowered to identify those to be counted'' in thecensus, responded Ridge.
The Census Bureau's $4 billion budget forthe census is large enough to identify and separate out the illegalaliens, he said.
Rep. Mervyn Dymally, D-Calif., charged the debate is really overpopulation shifts that will lead to more House seats for southernand western states.
``Pennsylvania, I don't care what they do, unless they go downto the Southwest and bring the people back, they're going to lose aseat,'' said Dymally.
Census officials generally have opposed any attempt to deleteillegal aliens, contending they cannot determine who is in thecountry legally.
Asking people about their status likely wouldresult in people lying or refusing to participate in the count,officials say, resulting in a potential undercount of residents inmany areas.
