Introduction:   From a helicopter
, the wave-washedbeach looks as if the worst oil spill in U.S. history had nevertouched it.
Silvery sticks of driftwood poke through a deep blanket of snow,and smooth gray pebbles roll in the surf under the gaze of a baldeagle perched in a shoreside spruce.
The pungent odor of petroleum wafts through the air as the holeturns black with crude oil, an oozing remnant of the 10.8 milliongallons spilled into Prince William Sound last March 24 by thetanker Exxon Valdez.
Bridgman scoops up a shovelful of gravel, lugs it to the water'sedge and dumps it in.
There are hundreds of beachesall over the sound that are still oiled, and the oil is slowlybleeding out.
``The beaches can look beautiful at the surface, but you can digdown, in this case just a few inches below the surface, and findlots of oil.
A year after the wreck of the Exxon Valdez, the question clingslike the oil under this Perry Island beach.
Certainly, the worst isover; thousands of dead birds no longer wash up on shorelines asthey did last summer.
As a growingslick of lawyers haggles over who is to blame, Exxon Corp. andgovernment agencies debate how to clean up what's left andscientists track wildlife populations' first steps on the long roadto recovery.
Any hope of a quick solution faded last summer as oil from theExxon Valdez spread across 1,100 miles of Alaska's wild southerncoast.
A cleanup army of 12,000 workers polished rocks by hand, blastedbeaches with hot water and sprayed fertilizer to promote the growthof oil-eating microbes.
But when Exxon suspended its $2 billion cleanup inmid-September, it had recovered only 5 percent to 9 percent of theoil spilled, state officials estimate.
That leaves 50 percent to75 percent of the oil in the water, on the ocean bottom or onbeaches.
Some was soaked up by unwilling sponges: the seabirds, eaglesand sea otters whose carcasses now lie frozen in five vans in anAnchorage storage yard, awaiting their day as physical evidence incourt.
Workers found more than 1,000 dead otters, a sizable chunk ofthe spill area's total population of 15,000 to 22,000.
Many of Prince William Sound's 3,000 bald eagles also suffered;at least 151 died, most poisoned by scavenging the oily remains ofsome of the 34,400 dead seabirds recovered.
Those numbers alone make the Valdez spill the most lethal ever,but scientists say the actual death count is much higher,estimating that up to 90 percent of the seabirds caught in oil sankfrom sight or drifted out to sea.
``We never claimed that the spill put any animal on theendangered species list, but that's missing the point,'' said Fishand Wildlife spokesman Bruce Batten.
Oily carcasses were an obvious measure of the spill's impact,but victims also included less visible members of the ecosystem,such as young salmon and tiny intertidal creatures.
Assessment studies for these populations are not finished, andeven preliminary findings are hard to come by _
researchers havebeen told by lawyers to save their findings for court, where itseems nearly everyone involved in the spill is headed.
Joseph Hazelwood, skipper of the Exxon Valdez, is on trialthis month in Anchorage on charges including criminal mischief anddrunken driving of his vessel, and a federal grand jury recentlyissued criminal indictments against Exxon, starting a case thatcould take years to finish.
The statesued, claiming the company was negligent in responding to thespill, only to be countersued by Exxon, which claimed stateofficials hindered the use of chemical dispersants that could havebroken up large quantities of oil early on.
Information about the spill is filtered through this litigiousatmosphere, making much of it suspect.
Exxon distributesbefore-and-after pictures of cleaned beaches; Bridgman and otherstate officials, accusing Exxon of ``myth-making,'' eagerly makeroom for journalists on flights to oiled beaches.
State officials cite an October survey that showed 117 miles ofshoreline remained moderately or heavily oiled, with oil more thantwo feet deep in some spots.
Exxon officials, meanwhile, say their winter monitoring of 64sites shows wind and waves have scoured away, on average, more thanhalf the surface oil left in September, and up to 80 percent of theburied oil.
``From a layman's point of view, what's left out there is reallyinsignificant,'' said Exxon scientist Andy Teal.
