Just as prospects brighten for the beleaguered "chunnel,"Britain risks failing to take full advantage of thecross-channel link.
The Thatcher government's announcementyesterday that it wouldn't help fund a high-speed rail linkbetween London and the tunnel has fueled fears that thecountry's creaky transportation system will isolate Britainon the periphery of Europe.
Sarah Talbot-Williams, a spokeswoman for the Confederationof British Industry
, Britain's main employers' group says,"1992 is going to produce a much more competitive market. "
Ifwe don't have the infrastructure to get the goods to Europe,we'll continue our status as an island.
And although theproject's estimated cost has soared to #7.66 billion ($13.11billion) from #4.9 billion, tunnel executives have obtainedunderwriting for an equity rights offer and preliminaryagreement for more bank loans to cover the added cost.
"There will be no more talk of crisis," says AlastairMorton, chief executive officer of Eurotunnel PLC, theconsortium building the cross-channel link.
"But the lack of a high-speed rail link to London, andimproved service beyond, means Britain may miss out on thetunnel's total benefits.
"There is a danger of not being ableto exploit the tunnel to its full potential," says Prof.Christopher Nash, a transport expert at Leeds University inNorthern England.
The government's refusal to help fund a fast rail servicebetween London and the tunnel terminal at Folkestoneculminates an 18-month squabble.
European Rail Link Ltd., aconsortium formed last November to build the rail link, hadasked the government to contribute #350 million towards thetotal #2.6 billion cost of the link.
He said British Rail, which owns 50% ofthe consortium, would consider other options for a fast-raillink.
Defending the decision, Mrs. Thatcher earlier toldParliament that the government already had earmarked almost#2 billion for chunnel-related projects, including #600million on roads leading to the tunnel and #1.3 billion inpassenger and freight rail services.
"Britainwill enter the 21st century with an inadequate 19th-centuryrailway link," said John Prescott, the Labour Party'stransportation spokesman.
As a result of Thursday's decision, the journey time toLondon from Paris will be about three hours -- 30 minuteslonger than with a high-speed rail link.
Passengers boardinghigh-speed trains in Paris will zoom at 180 miles an hournorth to Calais, slow to 100 miles an hour through thetunnel, then crawl at an average of 60 miles an hour acrosssoutheast England's crowded commuter belt.
"The traffic will now speed through as far as our side ofthe tunnel, and then the men with red flags will lead it onto London," complains Keith Speed, a Conservative member ofParliament whose constituency is near the tunnel terminal.
The tunnel-buildingconsortium argues that only 39% of its total revenue willcome from direct London-to-Paris trains; the realmoney-spinner will be freight traffic hauled by road to thetunnel, then loaded onto special Eurotunnel wagons for thejourney under the channel.
"But Mr. Morton admits he wants to see the high-speed linkbuilt, professing it would divert traffic from southeastEngland's clogged roads.
"Some analysts go further, arguing the tunnel indeed needsbetter rail links if it is to compete with improving ferryand air services. "
A high-speed link which covers {only} partof the route proves to be fairly uncompetitive with othertransportation modes," says Bill Steinmetz, vice president oftransport for consultants Booz-Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc.
inLondon.
North of the capital,industrialists fear poor railway links will isolate them onthe fringes of the European Community's single market.
"The Channel Tunnel is a marvelous addition to theinfrastructure," says David Merrill, corporate-affairsdirector at Pilkington PLC, the big glass maker based in St.
Helens in Northwest England.
