Introduction:
Exxon officials Monday released a revisedplan for cleansing 364 miles of Alaskan coastline fouled by thenation's largest oil spill, but said their proposal requires asuspension of local environmental laws.
The plan makes no provisions for continuing the cleanup beyondmid-September, and notes that 191 miles of lightly oiled coastlinemay not be cleaned mechanically at all, but be allowed to be washednaturally by the environment.
``It is expected that this will be the case for all lightlyoiled Gulf of Alaska sites,'' said the two-part, 60-page report.
``We are going to have to take a hard look at that,'' respondedBill Lamoreaux, the ranking state environmental official monitoringthe cleanup.
Since March 24, when an Exxon tanker struck a reef outsideValdez and poured more than 10 million gallons of North Slope crudeinto Prince William Sound, Exxon has financed cleanup crewsfighting the spreading sludge.
The oil company's strategy, which was submitted to state andfederal authorities only hours before a deadline expired, dividesAlaska's oil-tainted shores into four categories
_ from the mostheavily polluted to those that are ``only lightly oiled.''
It covers polluted areas within Prince William Sound, as well asthose outside the immediate spill zone, and calls for nearly 3,400workers to participate in the cleanup.
The worst areas _ three miles of sludge-covered beaches onseveral small islands _ would be targeted immediately, with theothers scheduled for gradual cleansing through Sept. 15.
Exxon's plan calls for the recovered waste to be strained forusable oil that can be refined, and said the oil-laced wastewatercould be treated at the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co.'s disposalplant in Valdez.
The gunk and sludge that resists treatment or salvage will beburned or buried, according to the Exxon study.
Coast Guard Adm. Paul A. Yost Jr., the ranking federal officialtracking the cleanup, told reporters in Sacramento, Calif. that hewould decide whether to approve the proposal within a week.
Before the plan was released, Yost said he wanted much moredetail than Exxon's original cleanup plan, which included nothingon polluted areas outside the sound.
Meanwhile, tar and sludge from the Valdez spill fouled thebeaches of Alaska's wild Katmai National Park, drenching hundredsof sea otters and birds and threatening the huge brown bearsprowling the refuge.
The damage stretches along 260 miles of rocky, rugged coastlinesouthwestward from Cape Douglas some 500 miles from Valdez, parksuperintendent Ray Bane said Monday.
The oil has had an impact onvirtually the entire coastline of the park,'' Bane said.
The 4 million-acre park also is a haven for brown bears, acoastal cousin of the grizzly.
We have one verifiedsighting of a bear walking through the oil,'' Bane said.
Bane said an aerial survey showed an amorphous oil patch 10miles wide and more than 20 miles long in the Shelikof Strait,which is located along the migration route used by whales.
In Anchorage, a group called the Boycott Exxon Alliance hasscheduled a rally in front of Exxon's Alaska headquarters.
The attorneys general of Idaho, Oregon and Washington statescheduled a news conference Tuesday to call for a federalinvestigation into the sharp rise in the price of gasoline sincethe spill.
Exxon also received sharp criticism from the federal government,which accused the company of ``foot-dragging'' in the constructionof a second facility in Seward to aid in the cleanup of sea ottersfouled by the oil.
