Introduction:
Cloudy weather Saturday threatened tomar the show for thousands of Finnish and foreign skygazers hopingto glimpse a total solar eclipse in this land of the midnight sun.
The weather forecast took a turn for the worse in the evening,when the Finnish Meteorological Services predicted cloudy weatherwith a chance of showers for eastern Finland on Sunday.
In the eastern town of Joensuu, a television news broadcast lateSaturday showed it was already cloudy there with a light drizzlefalling.
After the total phase of the eclipse, the moon willmove away, uncovering more and more of the sun.
In Helsinki, the total eclipse phase will occur 16 minutes aftersunrise, when the sun is only 1 degree above the horizon.
AtJoensuu, 310 miles northeast of Helsinki, the sun will be 5 degreesabove the horizon in the total phase at a better angle for watchers.
Ten months ago, Joensuu hired an ``eclipse secretary'' to handlearrangements for the expected influx of visitors.
``We completely sold out the 10,000 special eyeglasses we madefor this event, and our extra stock is finished too,'' she said ina television interview Saturday.
During the past week, newspapers, television and radio have beenfull of information about solar eclipses, as well as advice forspectators not to stare directly into the sun.
Finnair, the national airline, hasarranged a dozen special flights for eclipse watchers, and privatecompanies with small planes will provide more.
The eclipse will be total in an arc about 125 miles wide fromthe northern Baltic Sea and southeast Finland, across the KolaPeninsula and northeast Soviet Union, to the Aleutian Islands nearAlaska.
Scientists will conduct several experiments during the eclipse,including gravity test measurements of the radius of the sun.
However, scientific interest in this eclipse has been less than inlonger eclipses, such as the seven-minute eclipse seen fromnorthern Kenya on June 30, 1973.
Seppo Linnaluoto of the Ursa Astronomical Association said thebest place for observations of this eclipse will be the northeastSoviet Union.
