Introduction:
It's been described as the largest current civilengineering project, a multibillion dollar link that will helprevolutionize Europe's economy and physically end Britain'shistoric isolation, a dream born in Napoleon's day.
But the three-tunnelthoroughfare under the English Channel is almost 60 percent overbudget, embroiled in a contractor dispute and scrambling for moreinvestment money.
The project also has raised increasing hostility among manyBritons, who fear it will provide an easy conduit for ills from thecontinent ranging from terrorism to rabid animals.
``We will have the money to finish the project,'' says AlastairMorton, British deputy chairman of Eurotunnel, the privately ownedAnglo-French company overseeing the work.
The Chunnel's June 15, 1993 scheduled debut will come six monthsafter the 12-nation European Community formally drops remainingtrade barriers and becomes a unified marketplace of 320 millionconsumers.
While the French are forging ahead with a high-speed rail linkto their end of the tunnel, for example, state-owned British Railis dragging.
``Britain becomes branch line of Europe,'' a Guardian newspaperheadline declared after the government announced June 14 that itwould not fund a high-speed rail link between London and theBritish end of the tunnel.
In this country, the attitude to theseprojects tends to be the reverse,'' Morton told a recent newsconference.
Eurotunnel Chairman Andre Benard said the company has providedfor any foreseeable problems, but stressed: ``We always made itvery clear that this was a risk project.''
Giant boring machines are digging three tunnels toward eachother from Folkestone, England and Calais, France, with the firstunderground meeting expected in November in the service tunnelbetween the rail tunnels.
Tunneling is three months ahead of schedule on the French side,a week behind on the British.
Chunnel trains will carry passengers, cars and freight betweenLondon and Paris in about three hours, roughly the same time as aflight including ground travel, and at least twice as fast as acar-ferry journey.
Eurotunnel estimates that 28 million passengers and 17 percentof Britain's non-oil trade will pass through the tunnel in thefirst year.
That step could clear the way for abank syndicate's approval of additional credit Eurotunnel hasrequested, from $8.6 billion to $12 billion.
Assuming banks approve, the project would have a total of about$14.6 billion in debt and equity financing.
The company mostrecently estimated it would cost $13.1 billion to complete, vs.$8.3 billion forecast initially.
But the order of magnitude of increase will slow down,'' saidRichard Hannah, a transport analyst with the London investment firmUBS Phillips and Drew.
``It's one of these situations where the more money you put in,the more you have to spend or else you're walking away frombillions of pounds,''
Hannah said.
Eurotunnel says it doesn't expect to p end ofthe century, and probably won't pay shareholders a dividend until1999, four years later than envisioned.
But stockholders haven'rofit before thet fared badly: The shares, firsttradedin November 1987 at about $6, have traded recently at $8.55.
Themore urgent worries for Eurotunnel have been costs, creditors andcontractor feuds.
In October, concern about the rising pricetag drove Eurotunnel'sbanking syndicate to freeze funds for three months until thecompany reached a truce with Trans-Manche Link, the consortium of10 British and French contractors doing the construction, overresponsibility for $1.7 billion in overruns.
The French government, on the contrary, is spending roughly $2.8billion building 210 miles of rail from Paris to the tunnel, with abranch to Brussels, where the EC is headquartered.
Trains capableof 190 mph will link the tunnel's freight and passengers to anotherplanned high-speed system.
On the other hand, residents of Kent, in England's rural andprosperous Southeast, have campaigned strenuously against havinghigh-speed trains screaming through their back yards.
