The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is floundering, and the international tin cartel has collapsed.
The promotional budget covers market research, a world-wide network of as many as 200 public-relations officials, and advertising campaigns coordinated by the agencies N.W.
Ayer &amp; Son in the U.S. and J. Walter Thompson Co. in 27 other countries.
Today the U.S. is the world's No.
About three-fourths of American women own diamond engagement rings that cost an average $1,300.
General "diamond image" advertising aims at perpetuating the mystique of quality diamonds as "the ultimate expression of love," he says.
One out of 17 Japanese couples bought engagement rings two decades ago.
Now two-thirds do, and Japan is the second-largest diamond jewelry market, followed by West Germany.
Each dealer gets a box containing uncut diamonds.
The dealer must accept or reject the entire box, valued at between $1 million and $25 million.
The cartel hasn't cut prices since it was founded more than half a century ago.
Despite grumbling, diamond dealers generally believe that a healthy international diamond market depends on the Syndicate.
OPEC members "tend to do what they like," says Jo Flies, chief economist of the Antwerp Diamond Council.
But De Beers is unique, he says, in influencing production and consumption of diamonds.
World diamond production has soared to 88 million carats from 47 million carats in 1982.
A carat equals 1/142 of an ounce.
About 20% of the prize diamonds are produced in southern Africa, but the market is being flooded by cheaper diamonds mainly from Australia and Zaire.
The Soviet Union, which produces an estimated 12 million carats of top-grade diamonds annually, is another unknown.
Other African nations in the cartel want more control over distribution, dealers say.
Recent history indicates, however, that it would be hasty to write off the cartel.
In 1981, Zaire, which mines 22% of world diamond output, left the cartel.
Australia was about to open a huge diamond mine and a speculative boom had led to widespread dealer bankruptcies.
The monopoly was threatened with extinction.
The top-grade investment diamond, D-Flawless, tumbled to around $8,000 a carat in 1985 from an average of $55,000 in 1980.
Dealers say trade is buoyant again because of lower interest rates and a weak dollar that makes dollar-priced diamonds cheaper in Japan and Europe.
The cartel will continue to control world diamond markets, Mr. Lachosky says.
"You can't mix diamonds with oil."

