But the 1988 drought wasn't as bad as it might have been,according to an Agriculture Department analysis.
Crop yieldsplummeted, but commodity prices rose.
The latest postmortem of the 1988 drought's effects was writtenby Gerald W. Whittaker of the department's Economic ResearchService.
As used by the agency, net farm income includes gross incomefrom farming during the calendar year, including federal payments,minus costs of production.
_ Despite drought, farms in all areas of the country continued toimprove their solvency position in 1988.
_Farms in the drought region received lower direct governmentpayments in 1988, despite an infusion of federal disaster relief.
In the category of net farm income, the report said the share offarms in a ``favorable financial position'' in 1988 held fairlysteady at 68 percent in the non-drought region, compared with 69.1percent in 1987.
In the drought states, 62.2 percent of the farms were said to bein favorable financial position, compared with 62.8 percent in 1987.
``Even with lower incomes, farmers in the drought regioncontinued to improve their debt position (in relation to assets),''the report said.
``A major factor in their improvement was thecontinued upward trend in land values.''
The report noted that higher market prices helped reduce thedirect payments to farmers in 1988 under USDA's commodity programs.
But Congress also provided nearly $3.9 billion in emergencydrought aid to farmers in 1988.
The nine states in the studycollected about $2.57 billion, or two-thirds of the total.
The Agriculture Department says inspectors are on guard againstitems that can carry Boophilus ticks into the United States.
Strict measures are being taken to prevent the reintroduction ofthe tick, he said.
For example, animal carcasses with hides attached are noteligible for importation into the United States.
Alternately, they may be dipped at one of severalMexican cattle export facilities along the border.
The Agriculture Department is using tiny wheatfields of one square foot each to monitor the spread of leaf andstem rust in the Southeast.
Results have been mixed.
The pilot study was begun in 1986.
Then in 1988, some of the wheat plotson low ground near the Gulf Coast drowned out.
Highway maintenance crews sometimes mow down the wheat, alongwith the weeds, Roberts said.
But Roberts, who works at the agency's research facility atGriffin, Ga., said the small test plots show real promise as asurvey method.
