Introduction:If Washington state imposes term limits on itscongressional delegation Tuesday, the issue of whether or notsuch limits are constitutional will take center stage.
But critics of state-imposed term limits on Congress missthe point.
The constitutionality of such state term limits may,however, be tested next month.
Three U.S.House members, led by Democrat Larry Smith, have filed briefsasking the court to rule state term limits unconstitutional.
The court will hear arguments Friday, and may rule later thismonth.
Nevertheless, the California decision demolished many ofthe legal arguments made by incumbents.
They argued that voters were denied theright to be represented by the same legislator indefinitely,and that term limits discriminated against incumbents anddenied them their right to equal protection of the laws.
California's highest court rejected all of these arguments.
Term limitations do not restrict the right to vote for acandidate because of his or her ideology or party.
Therefore,they do not deprive voters of the freedom to associate withcandidates based on their viewpoint or with any particularparty.
They may vote for that candidate again aftera "waiting period" has ended.
Federal courtshave upheld many state restrictions on who may qualify forballot access.
They have never held reasonable,non-discriminatory restrictions on who may run a violation ofthe right to vote.
Likewise, term limits do not violate the Equal ProtectionClause of the 14th Amendment.
Unlike the age, residency and citizenship requirements,term limits do not prevent any non-incumbent from running forCongress.
Nor do they prevent a House member who has reacheda term limit from running for the U.S. Senate or vice versa.
The Supreme Court has long held that the power to ensure afair electoral system, truly responsive representation inCongress and a high degree of citizen participation inelections rests with the states.
This law was found not tobe an improper additional qualification because a valid stateinterest was pursued.
On this basis, term limits merely ensure afair election system and the "republican form of government"guaranteed the states under the Constitution.
Should the court rule against term limits by the states,numerous other ballot access restrictions will likely bepassed that have many of the same effects as term limits.
Oneoption would limit an incumbents' access to the ballot.
Presumably, if an incumbent were trulyeffective and popular he wouldn't find that a crushingobstacle.
Two sitting U.S. House Members won their firstterms as write-in candidates.
Another option would require candidates to have "ballotstatements" appear next to their names.
Each candidate wouldhave to answer the question: "Will you adhere to a -- yearterm limit? "
The answer would appear on the ballot so voterswould know a candidate's views on term limits.
Many suchballot restrictions have been upheld by the courts.
Incumbents should take heed.
If they count only on thecourts to safeguard their political castles, they may be infor a rude surprise.
