Introduction: Fire long ago destroyed the house where Clarence Thomas spent his boyhood.
Abandoned by his father, driven by his hard-eyed grandfather and a band ofnuns sent south to teach black children, young Clarence learned sharecroppingand scholarship, hard labor and the Latin mass, and how to survive the walkhome through black Savannah in his Catholic school uniform.
By the time hearrived in Washington with the Reagan administration, he had developed into arare breed -- a black conservative so impressive to Republican presidents thathe was set on the road to the highest court in the land.
But he was sodisturbing to traditional liberals that they are eager to deprive him ofSenate confirmation in September.
Historically, trying to predict SupremeCourt nominees has been extremely risky.
Still, many liberals are convincedthat Thomas' past clearly shows his future.
He would, they say, opposeabortion rights, school busing plans and affirmative action programs.
They see him as anindependent spirit, a probable centrist on a court that has been steeringrightward for several years.
The Georgia beginningBut any attempt tounderstand the potential successor to the revered Thurgood Marshall must beginin Georgia.
"The grandfather,the late Myers Anderson, began training Thomas in earnest when the boy was 9and Leola Williams' life suddenly began coming apart.
Then he'd say, 'Old Man Can't is dead.
I helped bury him.'
Thomas, who had experienced racialmistreatment by white seminarians in Georgia, ultimately rejected seminarylife.
He has identified an episode at Immaculate Conception Seminary inConception, Mo., in 1968 as the final humiliation.
He helped found a Black StudentUnion, writing and typing its constitution.
Stung, school officialsgranted a blanket amnesty and the students returned.
"Yale law students, Singleton explained,were exposed to conservative law professors with powerful minds.
"But it was Thomas Sowell, the conservative blackeconomist now at Stanford University's Hoover Institution, whose work came togrip Thomas' mind.
In that book, Sowell, arguing from a laissez-faire perspective,endorsed the notion that blacks would benefit more from pursuing economicachievement than political agitation.
Danforth brought Thomas to Jefferson City, Mo., to work in theattorney general's office.
When Danforth became a U.S. senator in 1977,Thomas stayed in St. Louis to work as an assistant counsel for the MonsantoCorp.
, then in 1979 joined Danforth in Washington as a legislative aide.
Therecontroversy dogged him for the next eight years.
Congress learned in 1989that the EEOC under Thomas' direction had permitted more than 13,000 agediscrimination claims to lapse.
But he was unwilling to go along with more stridentvoices in the Reagan administration who opposed most legal remedies fordiscrimination, so he often felt isolated from both the administration and thecivil rights establishment.
Several years ago, a top Reagan domesticadviser who wanted his coffee cup refilled at a black-tie dinner looked up andspotted a black man in a tuxedo hovering near the table.
Holding the cupaloft, the official asked for more coffee.
I'm ClarenceThomas.
1990; .
.
.Onquotas:"Federal enforcement agencies .
.
.
"; .
.
.On affirmative action: Hereferred to it as "social engineering .
.
.
.
We're standing the principle ofnon-discrimination on its head.
";    .
.
.How justice is chosen; President:The president nominates Supreme Court justices.
Qualifications: The Constitution sets noqualifications for justices.
; .
.
.
.Sources: Chicago Tribune, World Book Encyclopedia,Compton's Encyclopedia, Who's Who Among Black Americans, news reports;Knight-Ridder News Service  
