Introduction: A tornado blasted through this NorthFlorida town before dawn today, destroying several homes and acollege library, blowing off rooftops, flipping cars and leavingfour people dead and 15 injured, officials said.
``There was this huge roar and then I heard a tree crack outthere and thought we were all gone,'' said Marie Prince, a MadisonCounty sheriff's dispatcher.
The tornado passed only four blocksfrom her office.
A house-to-house search found no more bodies, but a man and ababy had to be freed from separate homes where they were trapped,Peavy said.
Not even a dish.
Rescue units from adjoining counties were helping out, alongwith state law enforcement and forestry officials.
State prisonerswere also on their way to help with the cleanup, Peavy said.
Trees, roofs andmobile homes were damaged, and at least six other injuries werereported.
The twister blew away several homes, blew the roof off a nearbychurch, overturned cars and knocked down trees, Peavy said.
As far as his office knew, all the damage was from one tornado,Peavy said.
He said the tornado's sweep through town lasted under30 minutes.
Electric company workers were restoring power throughout thearea.
Three homes and a trailer were destroyed and five homesseriously damaged, he said, and two people were slightly injured.
Many county roads were blocked by fallen trees, he said, andofficials were surveying the area by helicopter.
Elsewhere in Georgia, trees and power lines were reported blowndown, a barn was reported destroyed and a tin roof was blown off anold building.
Thesheriff's office said the wind left the homes in shreds.
A 9-year-old girl from Cottonwood, Ala., was injured bylightning as she stood near a stove at her home Monday night.
In the eastern Georgia's Bulloch County, six mobile homes andone house were heavily damaged shortly after dawn today, but noinjuries were reported, the weather service said.
Tornado watches were still in effect across 14 southeasternGeorgia and 15 northeastern Florida counties until at least fivehours after the tornado hit.
