Their reasoning is quite simple.
The expectation is that growth in US exports to Mexico and Canadawill outpace growth in imports from its neighbours to the north and south.
Most Wall Streeteconomists are pro-Nafta, as are the majority of business leaders, if recentpolls are to be believed.
What if Congressvotes no?
In this scenario, inflation would be the biggest concern of markets.
Manyeconomists argue that the competitive forces unleashed by the acceleratingcollapse of international trade barriers have helped restrain globalinflation.
Low worldwide inflation has kept bond yields at historic lows,which in turn have boosted share prices to record highs in many markets.
Thus, any reversal in that trend - a return of trade barriers, higherinflation, higher bond yields, - could undermine equity markets that arealready vulnerable to a sharp downward correction because of expensive stockvaluations.
On paper, this should not be a particularly difficult task,because Congress is controlled by Democrats.
Because the domestic labour marketremains weak, this line has struck a strong chord with ordinary Americans.
The result is that the President faces a tough fight ensuring that the Houseof Representatives votes to approve the treaty on Wednesday.
As of yesterday, the outcome of the vote was deemed too close to call.
Stockmarkets in Mexico and the US, however, believe the chances of success forNafta improved this week.
Whether this helped swing the votes of some anti-Nafta legislators theClinton administration's way remains to be seem.
Nafta is playing on investors' minds because doubts over its passage throughCongress have arisen at a vulnerable time for stock and bond prices.
A weekago bond yields jumped amid worries that resurgent economic growth mightrekindle inflation.
Although data released this week on producer andconsumer prices showed that fears of rising inflation are, at least for now,unjustified, equity investors remain nervous about rising bond yields.
-----------------------------------------------Monday 3647.90    +   04.47Tuesday        3640.07    -   07.83Wednesday      3663.55    + 23.48Thursday       3662.43    -   01.12Friday         3684.51    +   22.08 -----------------------------------------------
