Introduction: A white Long Beach police officer who allegedly pushed a black man through a plate-glass window during an arrest that was secretly videotaped by a television crew acknowledged Friday that he made errors in his official report.
Officer Mark Dickey, speaking publicly for the first time since the Jan. 14 incident, told a state Senate oversight committee in sworn testimony that he had so little faith in his own report that he would not want it used against him if he were suspected of a crime.
He blamed the discrepancies on a faulty memory, saying he wrote the report more than three hours after the altercation occurred.
Police Misconduct Allegations Sen. Daniel Boatwright (D-Concord), chairman of the Senate Select Committee on State Procurement and Expenditure Practices, called the hearing into the incident to review allegations of police misconduct in Long Beach.
The legislative committee monitors state funds disbursed to police departments by the state Police Officer Standards and Training Commission.
Investigations have been launched by the FBI, the Los Angeles County district attorney's office and the Long Beach Police Department.
Boatwright questioned whether the car in which Jackson was riding was actually weaving -- the stated cause for the traffic stop -- and whether Jackson acted aggressively toward the officers, as Dickey said in his report.
"No," Dickey tersely replied.
Dickey's attorney, Michael Hannon, refused to allow Dickey to answer any more questions after nearly three hours of questioning because of what he called the "hostile and badgering" nature of the inquiry. "
This little kangaroo court gives these politicians a chance to run for office.
Any resemblance between this and a fair hearing is just imaginary," Hannon told reporters afterward.
"They are taking stuff out of context and just badgering him with it."
He alleged that in addition to pushing his face into the glass, Dickey hurt him by bending his fingers while handcuffing him and pushed his face into the hood of the police car.
No Taunts Heard The report states that Jackson challenged the officer to fight, although Jackson never is heard taunting the officer on the tape.
Dickey said that he was swearing to try to alleviate his fear.
He said his actions were an attempt to "accomplish my No.
1 job that night: to go home in one piece."
Dickey denied it.
The officer said Jackson's face crashed through the window when Jackson suddenly pulled forward.
He said he is troubled, though, that Long Beach police are investigating his background on the Hawthorne Police Department rather than concentrating on the incident.
Boatwright adjourned the hearing, which was held at the Hall of Administration in downtown Los Angeles, after about six hours of testimony.
He said it would reconvene later to hear from the additional witnesses.

