De Beers is resisting any change.
He said: 'Because the major (diamond) producers freely consent to sellexclusively through one channel, the CSO is able to preserve an orderlymarket by matching rough diamond sales closely to consumer demand.
'However, IDC (Holdings), a London-based group which claims to be the mostexperienced and substantial dealer in rough diamonds independent of the CSO,suggests the CSO's attitude 'is unreasonable and based on a conceptualargument with little substance in fact.
On a political level this would enable the government toanswer its critics or its electors with confidence and sure knowledge whenquestioned about arrangements for the disposal of the country's mineralassets.
'It is not unreasonable to reflect whether the fact that Botswana is theonly major producer currently selling 100 per cent of its production to theCSO has any bearing on the substantial profits made by the CSO on the saleof its diamonds.
IDC does have a vested interest.
It acknowledges that all sectors of the diamond trade welcomed the CSO'sefforts to keep the diamond market stable.
But 'the fact that the CSO formspart of an aggressive, profit-motivated public company with a primaryresponsibility to its shareholders is often lost from view.
He is not a trader, he does notknow what the stones are worth in the market.
It is not the firsttime that contract negotiations have gone on past the theoretical deadline.
Prices of rough diamonds, with few exceptions, have moved upwards every yearsince the 1930s depression.
But now De Beers is steering the world's mostsuccessful cartel through depressed market conditions caused by therecession in the US (the biggest single market for diamonds), sogginess inJapan (the second-largest), and the Gulf war.
To maintain price stability, the CSO is stockpiling diamonds at greatexpense, rather than releasing unwanted stones to the market.
Itspromotional budget has been lifted by 20 per cent to more than Dollars 1m aweek - Dollars 53m for the year.
However, the CSO is also currently involved in contract negotiations withArgyle Diamonds, the western Australian company which is the biggestindividual diamond producer in volume (but only sixth in value) terms.
Argyle, too, wants to stay with the CSO when its contract ends on May 1 -but on more favourable terms.
However, the 'market window' idea isunlikely to be dropped and will almost certainly be raised again when thenext contract negotiations start.
