It was one of their best days ever.
Bonds issued by the besieged republic traded briskly andclimbed to records.
A full 100% of the corporate stocks --all two of them -- held steady or rose.
The price of vouchersto obtain foreign exchange jumped 10%, even though Slovenebanks had stopped issuing foreign currency.
No one touchedthe stocks.
The foreign exchange rights went begging.
Their bravado is undiminished,reflected in the almost unanimous feeling that there can beno going back now that blood has been spilled in defense ofindependence.
For the moment, the Slovenes are feeling lonely,unrecognized by the nations of the world.
Their considerabletrade with the rest of Yugoslavia, which helped make them thecountry's richest people, is vanishing.
Nationalismovershadows pragmatism, a quality that once distinguishedSlovenia from the rest of the often bewildering Balkans.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has heldup recent events here -- the Yugoslav army assault onSlovenia and the bitter ethnic clashes between Croats andSerbs -- as a warning to his land of what can happen whennationalism fractures a country.
While the European Community is counting on the peace planit brokered to defuse tensions (it calls for a three-monthperiod of negotiations in Yugoslavia), most governmentsconcede that the country's breakup is inevitable.
"This shunning by Western Europe, and the U.S., isparticularly disillusioning for a people who enjoy theirBMWs, Peugeots and Fiats, their shopping trips to Munich andVenice and their vacation chalets in the Alps.
The per capitaannual income of nearly $7,000 is 10 times that of thesouthern regions of Yugoslavia.
When remindedby a visitor that Austria, in contrast, is posting robustgrowth, he grows somber.
"It's yourability to engage in international trade that makes youviable.
Butthe recent fighting, they believe, ended all hope of economicunion.
"Unbelievable," scoffs Mr. Skoberne as he reads a lettertelefaxed from the council of Banja Luka, a town with a largeSerbian population in the province of Bosnia-Hercegovina,decreeing that all Slovene-owned assets in the city are to beinventoried and frozen.
One of the major motivations behind Slovenia'sindependence grab was to free itself from the "Yugoslav risk"that hampered most attempts to attract foreign investment.
Now, Mr. Skoberne and others worry about an emerging "Slovenerisk."
I wouldn't do it, either.
"
