Introduction: A colossal tunneling machineis boring beneath the English Channel from the white cliffs ofDover, pursuing a dream born in Napoleon's time that is coming trueat last.
Another is digging from the French coast in what the tunnelbuilders call the largest civil engineering project now under wayin the world.
Tunneling speed at the Dover end is less than 15 feet an hourand the machine boring from the geologically more complex Frenchend moves even slower, which is why the tunnel will not open until1993.
Some wonder whether Britain will beready for it.
``They're still arguing about whether it willintroduce rabies into this country, or let in terrorists.''
``They discuss it in terms of their being an island race, with achannel that has kept out invaders,'' she said in an interview.
Arriving channel trains will terminate at Waterloo station insouth London, at a large customs and immigration terminal.
Criticssay this will waste time and Britain should follow the continentalpractice of handling such matters on the train during the journey.
British stations, bridges and tunnels are not built for the tallloads commonly carried across the channel.
The grandiose project has been on and off the drawing boards formore than 200 years.
Digging began in 1882 but was halted by Britishfears of French invasion through the tunnel.
Britain's entry into the European Economic Community engendereda spirit of unity and the digging began again in 1974, but twoyears later a new British government shelved the project.
``There's no way that politicians will cancel this project,''Kirkland said in an interview.
Eurotunnel ordered a management shakeup and threatenedTrans-Manche Link, the consortium of 10 British and Frenchengineering companies building the tunnel, with penalties of $25million if the diggers did not pass the three-mile mark by Nov. 1.
From a a rate of 380 feet a week, the pace quickly acceleratedand recently achieved a week's record of 480 feet, Kirkland said.
The timetable calls for 650 feet a week and Kirkland is confidentof reaching it.
The tunnel, 80-130 feet below the seabed, was 2 miles into thechannel from this end Oct. 9, the most recent measurementavailable, and the French had progressed about 1,300 feet.
Diggingbegan last December.
At its peak, the project will employ about 11,000 workers and 11tunneling machines.
Construction of the two one-way train tunnels begins inDecember.
A smaller service tunnel running between them now isbeing dug.
Tunneling machines simultaneously dig, remove rock and put uptunnel walls.
Once theall-clear is given, the two-story-high rotating blade with itstungsten teeth resumes chewing ahead.
Cars and trucks will drive onto the shuttle trains and be ableto stay in their vehicles or stroll about during the 35-minutetunnel passage.
