According to information published in the Yugoslav newspapers, the Slovene Government could be addressing this issue soon.
The establishing of relations between the two states, the exchange of diplomatic representatives, and the abolition of the visa requirement for Yugoslav citizens are some of the topics to be considered.
This information has not been denied and, apart from that, it is the logical conclusion to a series of statements issued by Slovene politicians, which pointed to a change in relations toward Belgrade.
The announcement about the normalization of relations were also supported by information that an official Slovene delegation had arrived in Belgrade for this purpose, but it was stated that the details cannot yet be published since the matter is very delicate.
The FRY Ministry of Foreign Affairs is denying that any official Slovene delegation came to Belgrade.
It is stated that this is rather a visit of businessmen, since these contacts have not been interrupted.
It is assumed in the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs that Slovene businessmen might even be checking the atmosphere for possible political contacts, but there have been no official statements about it.
One could even say with distrust.
Official Belgrade has not forgotten "the extremist, anti-Serbian statements issued by Milan Kucan in Albania" or the moves made by Slovene statesmen who "instead of soothing the passions, stirred them up, always to Serbia's disadvantage."
I am now speaking about the official Slovene attitude, not about the attitudes of all the politicians, and especially not about the attitudes of the Slovene people."
Diplomatic Pirouettes At that time the press carried statements made by Milan Kucan and Lojze Peterle that unquestionably represented a shift in policy toward Belgrade.
The European Union initiative makes us hope that the situation in the Balkans can be solved."
In the view of Slovene political commentators, the softening of the Slovene attitude toward the FRY is a part of the diplomatic tactics the aim of which is to adapt Slovene policy to the policy of the European Union, with which Slovenia is awaiting negotiations about associate membership.
In the focus of Serbian attention now are relations with Croatia, and as far as Slovenia is concerned, the official proposal for the normalization of relations has to be specified first.
Single statements and "diplomatic pirouettes" are not enough to overcome the present differences, including the Slovene attitude toward Kosovo, the interruption of economic relations, the way Slovene independence was achieved by force, and diplomatic duels on the international scene.
[Box, p 7]Jovanovic: "Slovenia Must Excuse Itself"  " In order to enter the process of normalization of relations with Slovenia, certain conditions must be fulfilled first," Vladislav Jovanovic, FRY minister of foreign affairs, said in a statement for POLITIKA, and added: "First it is necessary for Slovenia to excuse itself for the rude and impertinent move it made a year ago in refusing the Yugoslav offer of recognizing Slovenia.
In addition, Slovenia supports the lifting of the arms embargo on the Bosnia- Herzegovina Muslims.
On the contrary, while we lived together, we had excellent relations.
That is why our surprise was great when the turnaround occurred.
Yugoslavia is interested in good relations with all of its neighbors -- old and new alike.
Slovenia is no exception.
We cannot account for the hostility that they have shown toward Yugoslavia and toward the people who are living in this region now.
Official Slovenia should find ways and means to end this hostility.

