Placing his hand across the man's mouth, the officer then marched him away before a gathering crowd of gaping passersby.
"It's purely based on race or dress, not on whether you are involved in any drug activity," said Gary Trichter, a Houston defense lawyer and former police officer who specializes in such cases.
Such suspicious behavior include erratic movements, paying for tickets with cash, using an alias, boarding a long flight without luggage and staying briefly in distant cities known to be sources of narcotics.
Last year, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that government agents may stop and question airline passengers who look and act like drug couriers.
But the court said brief detentions must be based on a person's behavior, not just on race or appearance.
William Booth.
"It is certainly not something based on any prejudice or racism.
It's based on trying to protect the public."
He said that last year, 254 narcotics arrests were made at Los Angeles International Airport.
Through Aug. 3 of this year, there have been 121 such arrests.
"We have any number of investigative techniques and ways to identify people involved in moving drugs, but a profile is not one of them," he said.
Morgan is seeking unspecified damages, claiming that his civil rights were violated.
Last April, a six-person federal jury rejected Morgan's case.
"There isn't any possible other conclusion but that the stop was illegal," the judge concluded.
"I wish that this hadn't happened," Searle said.
"I wish (Morgan) luck now that I know who he is.
I just hope I never see him again."
Morgan could not be reached for comment.
But in court documents, he said that on March 15, 1988, he was waiting at Los Angeles International Airport for a connecting flight to Tucson to attend a golf tournament and was innocently making a phone call when Searle suddenly grabbed his shoulder and spun him around.
Instead, Morgan filed his complaint, in part, to discourage similar incidents from occurring, his attorneys said.
"This happened to Joe Morgan, but it really is applicable to any black person who uses Los Angeles airport," said Oakland attorney Edwin Wilson Jr., who also is black.
"If it wasn't Joe, this could have happened to me or my father or to any other black person."
"I wish it didn't happen.
He just sort of went out of control."
Assistant City Atty.
"My argument is that Mr. Morgan overreacted," Lewis said.
"If he had cooperated, none of this would have happened.
They said he was using an alias.
Since the passenger was black and indicated that his companion "looked like me," the officer began looking for a black man who was nervous-looking or having "other characteristics of a narcotics courier. "
