The Long Beach City Council voted Tuesday to ask the district attorney's office to launch an independent investigation of the Saturday night incident, which was secretly recorded by an NBC television crew.
But Assistant Dist.
Atty.
Curt Livesay said the office was already looking into the case at the request of the Long Beach police chief.
If such an inquiry reveals that brutality was involved, either misdemeanor or felony charges could be filed against the officer, he said.
He refused to say who had requested the federal investigation.
Full Tape Withheld While edited portions of the tape have been broadcast, Long Beach officials have said they need to see everything filmed by the NBC crew to move ahead with their own investigation of the incident.
NBC officials have declined to release the full tape, saying that it would violate company policy to release unedited footage.
They have, however, been reassigned from patrol duty to the detective bureau, he said.
Called 'Unfortunate' At Tuesday's City Council meeting, the mayor called the incident "an unfortunate set of circumstances.
We will not tolerate this.
.
.
.
We need to find out what happened here and make sure it never happens again."
An investigation by the district attorney will add credibility to the city's own consideration of the brutality allegations, Kell said.
Attorney Michael Hannon, who is representing the two officers, said Tuesday that he will contest any allegations of brutality.
They denied that Jackson's head was shoved through the window, saying that his elbow smashed the glass.
Spokesman David Lynn maintained that Hill, the driver of the car, was not violating any traffic laws when he was stopped.
Clarence Smith, the only black member of the Long Beach City Council, said he found the tape "shocking."
"It's real hard to tell what's happening below the waist," said Councilman Evan Anderson Braude, maintaining that it is vital that NBC release the rest of its videotapes.
He said the two officers saw the car weave within the traffic lane and wanted to check the driver for drunkenness.
"I'm sure neither Mr. Jackson nor the officer wanted the window to break, because it was dangerous."
He said Jackson had an eye for the camera when he screamed as Dickey moved him over to the police cruiser for arrest.

