He and others blasted Exxon for failing to be prepared for thespill and not rapidly responding to the accident that fouledhundreds of miles of Alaska's coast.
The oil company's cleanup strategy must gain Yost's approvalbefore being put into effect.
Yost said he would make a decision onthe proposal within a week.
``There'snot a lot of backup or substantiation.
It was quite light, verythin.
``We are going to be done this summer,'' Yost said.
``Somebeaches are going to be sparkling, some beaches are going to be farfrom sparkling.''
Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner, who is to make hissecond trip to Alaska on Wednesday as overall coordinator for thecleanup, said he expected the size of the operation to double ortriple by the end of the month.
However, he said the cleanup, to be paid for by the oilindustry, could add $100 million to $500 million to Alaska'seconomy, which he said is more than the effect of the fishingindustry.
ExxonPresident William D. Stevens said the company was ``turning heavenand Earth to set things right.''
Exxon's 60-page, two-part revised strategy to cleanse some 364miles of Alaska's coastline of the oil spilled March 24 by thetanker Exxon Valdez was released Monday.
``We saw 2,000 to 3,000 dead birds.
... You can't really tellwhat they are.
They're one big blob of oil,'' said Ray Bane,superintendent of Katmai National Park, about 275 miles southwestof Valdez.
``We found large oil debris washing and slopping up on ourshores.
...
It was very bad,'' Bane said.
``We saw eagles carryingoil-covered birds.
State and federal officials said the focus of the cleanup ismoving southwest, following the drifting oil along the AlaskaPeninsula through the Shelikof Strait east of Kodiak Island.
Oilhas tainted the coast at least as far as Chignik, 525 milessouthwest of Valdez.
But Bill Lamoreaux, the ranking state environmental officer atthe spill, said the laws would not be relaxed.
``The generalfeeling is that we would expect that they would comply with theenvironmental laws,'' Lamoreaux said.
U.S. Sens.
James Exon and Bob Kerrey, both Nebraska Democrats,called on U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to investigatepotential price gouging by the oil industry.
``As you know,'' he told reporters, ``the market for petroleumproducts is set by thousands of markets, thousands of independentdealers across the nation.
''
