India's chief election commissioner, T.N.
He acted after consulting the president and the acting prime minister.
At least 14 other people, including a senior police officer, died in theblast.
Officials in New Delhi said the blast was caused by either a timebomb or remote-control device.
It is not clear whether the bomb was thrown at Gandhi orwhether he was handed flowers that contained explosives.
He had been receivingbouquets and garlands all evening.
Gandhi recently had been shrugging offsecurity guards.
There was no immediate indication who was responsible forthe bomb, but speculation centered on Tamil separatists seeking an independentstate in nearby Sri Lanka.
President Bush and other world leadersexpressed horror and sadness at the slaying.
His widow, Sonia, sobbed and hugged the couple's daughter Priyanka as thewomen stepped down from the air force Boeing 737 that had flown them to Madrasto bring Gandhi's body home.
Even before Gandhi's death, more than 150people had died this week in violence connected to the election.
After theassassination, violent mobs rampaged along roads leading to Madras on Tuesdaynight, smashing vehicles and other property, according to Indian newsagencies.
The CIA is oftenblamed by India's conspiracy-minded political activists for a wide variety ofthe country's ills.
Police fired shots inthe air to drive away the angry, shouting crowd.
There were no injuries.
"It's a tremendousloss to democracy," senior Congress leader Vasant Sathe told reporters. "
Theloss can never be made up."
Gandhi and hisCongress Party have many enemies on the subcontinent, including violentseparatists in Kashmir and Punjab, leftist revolutionaries and rightist Hindumilitants.
Gandhi, whose Congress Party provided the mainbacking to the New Delhi government at the time, was widely seen as beingbehind the dismissal, which angered the Tamil Tigers and their supporters insouthern India.
An even tougher test for the Congress -- and the centristideology that has held India together for four decades -- has been mounted byHindu ultranationalists from the Bharatiya Janata Party, who denounced Gandhifor allegedly pandering to India's Muslim minority and directing too manygovernment resources to religious and caste minorities in an effort to winvotes.
Election in India: turmoil and tragedyThe Congress Party, whichhas dominated Indian politics since independence in 1947, is being challengedby a center-left coalition that wants to break down the caste system and aright-wing party that seeks a more openly Hindu, less secular India.
Caste membership is a birth-givencondition that remains unchangeable during a lifetime.
Caste is defined byvarna (rank) and jati (group within rank).
Each varna is associated with acolor.
; ...
Political parties;   Congress Party: Centrist party, led India's independence struggle againstBritish colonial rule.
Is widely perceived as secular and pro-liberalization.
Has about195 Parliament seats.
Janata Dal: Led by former prime minister, V.P.Singh.
Won 142 Parliament seats in 1989, butlost nearly one-third after party split in November.
Bharatiya JanataParty: Economically and politically conservative pro-Hindu party.
Supported by militant Hindu groups.
Socialist Janata Dal: The party was formed in November with Congress Partybacking by current prime minister Chandra Shekhar, who heads interimgovernment.
Has about 50 seats in Parliament.
Was pilot for Air-India for nine years.
Assassinated during campaign stop Tuesday.
;    ... Indira Gandhi;   1917-1984Prime minister from 1966-'77 and from 1980 until assassinated bySikh militants.
Worked to establish a democracy, improve livingstandards.
;    ... Mohandas K. Gandhi;    1869-1948Leader ofnationalist movement, pioneered nonviolent resistance against British rule.
Assassinated by Hindu fanatic.
