America was founded on aphilosophy of individual rights, not group rights.
.
.
.
-- "America should not fall into the trap of blaming allthe problems faced by blacks or other minorities on others.
We are not beggars or objects of charity.
{Judge Robert} Bork was right about that,no question.
Judging requires a certain impartiality.
"At the same time, "impartiality is not the same thing asindifference.
This isn't law school speculation.
People's lives are affected.
Sometimes a man's life depends on the outcome.
That's not a responsibilityI take lightly.
No way.
Circuit, as evidence thatMr.
Writing in the Howard Law Journal in 1987, Mr. Thomasargued for what he called a "natural law" or "higher law"mode of judging, in which the judge examines not only thetext of the Constitution or statute but also the moralprinciples underlying the American form of government.
"When you're up before thoseconfirmation hearings, it's like going through Dante'sInferno.
.
.
.
I've seen a glimpse of that process.
When youget up there, you just hope that you don't get destroyed sothat even if you don't make it, you can go on with yourlife."Mr.
Abraham Lincoln oncesaid that the American founders declared the right ofequality whose enforcement would follow as soon ascircumstances permitted.
The more I learn about the ideals ofthose men, the more enthusiastic I get.
.
.
.
I believe inthe American proposition, the American dream, because I'veseen it in my own life."Mr.
The family shared a single outhouse with several neighbors.
Mygrandfather has been the greatest single influence on mylife," he claims.
In 1987 he told the Atlantic, "When thecivil rights people indict me, the man they are indicting isthat man.
He finished his undergraduate studies atHoly Cross College in Worcester, Mass.
"Iread Malcolm X. I became interested in the Black Panthers.
"In 1971 he founded the Black Student Union at Holy Cross.
Circuit in late 1989, a numberof these special interest groups prepared for a bloodbath.
The full Senateseated him with only two senators opposed.
The reason for thesmooth passage, EEOC vice chairman Ricky Silber man (whosehusband Laurence Silberman sits on the D.C.
Just as in his life, he turns negative valuesinto positive values, an amazing feat.
"Dean Robinson added, "People often confuse what Clarencethinks with what some of his friends on the right think, butClarence is his own man."
Once people figure thisout, maybe they'll leave me alone.
"
