More than 150 metersand gauges track seismic activity, rock strain, crustal tilt, tidalmovements and ground water levels.
Trains will be stopped, traffic routed out of the area, stores closed andpupils let out of schools.
Hospitals, firefighters and rescue crews will go on alert.
Andthen everyone will wait for an earthquake measuring eight on the Richterscale.
Despitethe protests, however, Japan's earthquake prediction programme rolls alongon inertia, insularity and unrealistic public expectations.
Research was alsobeing taken seriously in the US, Russia and China.
The Philippine SeaPlate is diving beneath the Eurasian Plate.
Friction between these platescauses the area's earthquakes.
The Tokai section last ruptured in 1854.
If the entire section rupturesagain, the resulting quake could reach eight on the Richter scale,endangering the lives of 10m residents in the area.
Since then, optimism about prediction has faded.
Predictionhinges on spotting anomalous phenomena, or precursors.
Precursors are often only recognised as such after a large earthquake.
Andmany earthquakes occur without any identifiable precursor, even inretrospect.
Kiyoo Mogi, chairman of the six-member panel that will make the call on theTokai earthquake and former head of the University of Tokyo's EarthquakeResearch Institute, says several factors make the Tokai region more suitedthan others for what he calls 'a national experiment'.The region's geology is straightforward, so they can narrow down the likelylocation of the anticipated earthquake.
Historically, strain along theSuruga Trough has been released in infrequent large earthquakes, rather thannumerous small ones.
The evidence is that significant strain has accumulatedalong the fault since the region's last big earthquake.
Recognising precursors will still be difficult.
Instead, the six experts are watching for the rapid upliftof the crust on the westward side of the trough that preceded quakes alongadjacent sections of the fault in 1944 and 1946.
This all makes a successfulprediction a long shot.
Prediction research elsewhere withered as scientists who could not convincereview committees of the scientific merit of their research lost theirfunding.
But, in effect, the budget is divided among researchersand institutions in the same proportions each year.
The public, and even public officials, remain largely unaware that Japan'sscientists are debating whether prediction is impossible or merelydifficult.
Public officials, however, are insisting the experts make an 'it'scoming' or 'it's not' decision.
Meanwhile, the controversy might be settledif the experts get their call from the technicians monitoring the Tokaidata.
