What he foreseesis a body blow to world poverty through bootstrap economics.
John Hatch says he hit upon his Third World``poverty vaccination'' while panic-stricken on a flight to Bolivia.
``And on my second double bourbon at 35,000 feet up flying overthe Andes, I have to say it was like this thought just rolledthrough my body,'' Hatch recalls.
``I had my calculator out and Iwas sketching this thing and I was doing numbers, and I arrived inLa Paz with a full-blown concept.''
What he had stumbled upon was village banking, a system ofinvestment using small revolving loans to poor women to financetheir private enterprise, allowing them to create savings whilepaying interest and qualifying for bigger loans.
The series of loans, starting at $50, is renewable over threeyears to a ceiling of $300, allowing recipients to reach a level atwhich they can qualify for commercial credit.
What Hatch envisioned on that plane five years ago hastranslated into 400 village banks in nine countries with more than35,000 members.
Portfolios total $1.6 million, with a 96 percentrepayment rate.
Village banks are operating in Mexico, Haiti,Thailand, Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica, Bolivia, Peru and ElSalvador.
The concept is similar to the one behind the Grameen Bank ofBangladesh: channeling money to the impoverished, principallymothers, without the demands of commercial banks for collateral, sothey can improve their families' lives.
What Hatch foresees is a body blow to world poverty throughbootstrap economics.
There is ``almost a 100 percent guarantee'' that increasedincome for women will go into improvements in their children'swelfare, Hatch says.
Though he's come upwith some sophisticated economic tools, he's kept thehumanitarianism.''
Capitalization for one bank typically will cost a sponsoringagency $5,000.
``They say things like, `Now I'm somebody,' or `My husbandrespects me more.'''
Their vehicle for improvement is the village bank, eachcomprised of 30 to 50 women who, through loans starting at $50, canearn enough to provide savings and create capital.
Hatch says theloans give them freedom to start their own investment projects inor near home.
She then contacts others to attend an organizing meeting.
``Forget the mayor, forget the priest, forget the chief,'' Hatchsays.
At the meeting, the women circle illustrated examples ofquick-turnover work they want the loans to finance.
It might beselling produce, groceries, baked goods, raising chickens, sewingor craftwork.
``Fifty percent or more are illiterate, and I would say 90percent of them don't have any idea of what they're getting intowhen we start out,'' says Hatch.
``And yet within 16 weeks they'reall experts.
They just learn as they go.''
Interest in village banking is mounting.
Rotary Club 100, a Phoenix organization, and a Rotary Club ofMexico City are in a joint venture, having funded five villagebanks in Guaymas, Mexico, with another four to be launched in theslums of Mexico City.
''
