Introduction:LONDON -- A shadow is falling across the light at theBritish end of the Channel Tunnel.
Just as prospects brighten for the beleaguered "chunnel,"Britain risks failing to take full advantage of thecross-channel link.
Sarah Talbot-Williams, a spokeswoman for the Confederationof British Industry , Britain's main employers' group says,"1992 is going to produce a much more competitive market. "
Ifwe don't have the infrastructure to get the goods to Europe,we'll continue our status as an island.
And although theproject's estimated cost has soared to #7.66 billion ($13.11billion) from #4.9 billion, tunnel executives have obtainedunderwriting for an equity rights offer and preliminaryagreement for more bank loans to cover the added cost.
"There is a danger of not being ableto exploit the tunnel to its full potential," says Prof.Christopher Nash, a transport expert at Leeds University inNorthern England.
The government's refusal to help fund a fast rail servicebetween London and the tunnel terminal at Folkestoneculminates an 18-month squabble.
European Rail Link Ltd., aconsortium formed last November to build the rail link, hadasked the government to contribute #350 million towards thetotal #2.6 billion cost of the link.
Transport Secretary Cecil Parkinson told the House ofCommons that the consortium's plans involved "unacceptable"risks for taxpayers.
He said British Rail, which owns 50% ofthe consortium, would consider other options for a fast-raillink.
Defending the decision, Mrs. Thatcher earlier toldParliament that the government already had earmarked almost#2 billion for chunnel-related projects, including #600million on roads leading to the tunnel and #1.3 billion inpassenger and freight rail services.
"Britainwill enter the 21st century with an inadequate 19th-centuryrailway link," said John Prescott, the Labour Party'stransportation spokesman.
"We make more money on road traffic using our tunnel," Mr. Morton says.
"There is in no sense a feeling we must havethat link to make the tunnel successful.
"If you're going to build high-speed rail, you haveto decide how to provide complete links.
"The worries don't end in London.
"The Channel Tunnel is a marvelous addition to theinfrastructure," says David Merrill, corporate-affairsdirector at Pilkington PLC, the big glass maker based in St. Helens in Northwest England.
"
