Introduction: On May 6 the Queen and President Mitterrand will declare the Channel Tunnelopen.
At the moment, agents report more inquiries, but the markets in bothcountries are still quiet and prices low, especially in France.
That is anexcellent long-term reason to buy.
The tunnel does not mean much to the continentals.
Most of the ferry trade is from Britain to France.
'The British are mainly looking for houses, rather than apartments, althoughFrench and Dutch buyers are also in the market.
Inquiries about northernFrench property picked up just before Christmas, says Maggie Kelly, ofFrench agents L'Abri-tanique in Hesdin.
Growing confidence in the UK market is slowly stimulating interest in Frenchproperty.
Prices have stopped falling in northernFrance and hopes are high that the tunnel, motorways and new railways willresuscitate the region.
But some paid far too much.
Spectacular price cuts can be found.
Four or five years ago it cost FFr2.5m (afterbeing put on the market at FFr4m).
However, show you have the cash and there are bargains to be had.
La Residence offers another with 28watercress beds and 12 hectares (30 acres) in good condition for FFr2.6m anda flat in town for FFr380,000.In Hesdin, the Wine Society, an English-based group of wine enthusiasts, hasan outlet for members where they can pick up society-recommended wines freeof UK taxes.
It has good shops - including the Philippe Olivier cheese shop  - andrestaurants.
The French favourite is Le Touquet, still an elegant place forParisians to spend le weekend.
Shops open in winter on Saturdays and Sundays -and close on Wednesdays and Thursday mornings.
You can play golf andtennis, ride, go to the casino and live in an elegant domaine in the Foret.
As in Deauville, the town's cachet has kept prices up.
Nearby, at Hardelot, there are plenty of building plots for sale beside thetwo golf courses (consult Latitudes).
At the other end of the tunnel Cluttons reports Belgians and Dutchregistering at the Canterbury office for period cottages for around Pounds200,000, and French and Belgians at the Folkestone office - where DavidParry reports that Arabs are interested in blocks of flats on the sea front.
'The tunnel has more psychological impact than anything.
Vendors see it as abonus.
Buyers don't see that yet.
'Once the tunnel is open, said Parry, industry will be attracted to the areaand people will move in.
An apartment in The Grand at Folkestone, the former hotel, is for sale fromCluttons for Pounds 89,500.
The value inFrance is formidable.
And it is not bad in Kent.
