With a system they call ``revolutionary justice,'' they havebanned drug abuse, prostitution, homosexuality and thievery from thevillages they control.
``They killed a few bandits and the rest got the message.''
Much of the appeal of the rebels is rooted in their reputationfor almost puritanical honesty.
``In a sense they enforce a hyper-Christian morality _ exceptthey kill you if you break the rules,'' said the Rev.
Paul Feeley, aCanadian Roman Catholic priest working in Aucayacu, 255 milesnortheast of Lima.
In late July four young homosexual men who rendezvoused at abridge a few miles outside Tingo Maria, 35 miles south of here, wereset upon and killed by the rebels.
Their bodies were dumped into theriver.
A few months earlier the rebels executed eight youths near TingoMaria for smoking cigarettes laced with semi-refined cocaine.
Violators are warned only once.''
Villagers say they are told, ``The revolution has a thousand eyesand a thousand ears.''
But here in the jungle-cloaked Upper Huallaga Valley, the world'slargest source of coca leaf, the Shining Path _ ``Sendero Luminoso''in Spanish _ enjoys the support of tens of thousands of farmersbecause the rebels protect them against a U.S.-funded cocaeradication program.
Although they prohibit drug consumption, the guerrillas defendcoca production as an important source of income for the peasants.
Their only condition is that the semi-refined coca paste be sent outof Peru.
The Colombians arrive in small planes at dozens ofclandestine airstrips throughout the 150-mile-long valley.
They say they feel protected from the violence of druggangs, corrupt local officials and ``abusive'' police.
For thecoca and for revenge,'' said Carlos Ferrer, a taxi driver whotravels the road between Tingo Maria and Aucayacu.
They robbed peasants; they raped their women.''
That view of the police as corrupt and abusive of their power iswidely held in the valley.
He gets off theplane from Lima with his hand out for a payoff.''
Official corruption is a problem throughout Peru, but in theHuallaga Valley it seems rampant.
And if you're a woman, also the bed.''
``Formal justice here is ineffective, corrupt and timeconsuming,'' he said.
``The Shining Path's justice is quick, freeand very effective.
''
