Introduction:Over the past two years, the Ventura County district attorney's office in four separate incidents has declined to prosecute suspects who contended that they were victims of police brutality while being arrested for various offenses by Oxnard officers, records show.
Instead, Anthony Flores, 22, was charged with five misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest.
The men involved in three of the five incidents have filed police brutality lawsuits against the city, the department or the police officers involved.
The suits, which seek unspecified damages and medical and legal expenses, are pending.
Two of the incidents have led to an investigation by the Police Department's internal affairs division.
Deputy Dist.
Atty.
Edward Brodie, misdemeanor supervisor for the office, said the decisions not to prosecute the suspects do not necessarily mean that Oxnard police were not justified in making the arrests.
The district attorney's office may have declined to prosecute the suspects because police brutality has been alleged, she said.
Prosecution is usually turned down when the arresting officer is suspected of using excessive force, she said.
Assistant Police Chief William Kady declined to discuss the brutality allegations against the Oxnard officers because of pending litigation.
He said, however, that the decisions by the district attorney's office not to prosecute the suspects do not reflect poorly on the department.
"I don't think our reputation is any worse than any other department's," he said.
Police had arrested Flores on suspicion of assaulting an officer and of resisting arrest but the district attorney's office decided two weeks later to prosecute Flores on the five misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest. "
Based upon my review of all the reports, the charges were the most appropriate charges to file," said Deputy Dist.
Atty.
Donald Gran, who declined to elaborate.
Police Chief Robert Owens has ordered an investigation into the incident.
Gonzalez was taken to St. John's Regional Medical Center, where he underwent surgery and spent two weeks recovering from his injuries.
The report, however, does not say why the dog attacked Gonzalez or whether Gonzalez resisted arrest.
Police arrested Gonzalez on suspicion of disturbing the peace, Brodie said.
But the district attorney's office declined to file any charges because the police report failed to show that Gonzalez was involved in the altercation, Brodie said.
Camarillo said Cornett fit the description of the man who allegedly brandished the weapon.
The Police Department declined to release Flores' arrest report because, police officials said, it contains his criminal history.
Flores was arrested on suspicion of resisting arrest and obstructing an officer.
McCracken said Flores never struggled with the officers until after he was placed in the choke-hold.
They essentially beat the hell out of him for nothing," she said.
Luna said in an interview that he, his wife and several friends were leaving the restaurant on July 16, 1988, when an Oxnard police car pulled up in front of the group.
The officer jumped out and started pushing me back against the pillar in front of the building, using his baton on my throat," Luna said in the complaint.
When he asked the officer why he was being shoved, Ruggiero told him that he was under arrest, according to the complaint.
Officers Steven Vendt and Humberto Jimenez were called to assist Ruggiero, the complaint said.
"They used forcible brutality by hitting me with the baton on my elbow, knees and back, forcing me to drop down on the sidewalk with my face slammed against the pavement," Luna said in the complaint.
Luna was arrested on suspicion of disorderly conduct under the influence of drugs.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Luna, but in September, 1988 -- before his trial began -- all charges against him were withdrawn for lack of evidence, Brodie said.
Owens ordered the department's internal affairs division to investigate Luna's complaint.
Luna had asked the city for $50,000 for medical expenses and to compensate for "humiliation suffered in public."

