Introduction: The new year ushers in a new wildfireseason, an unwelcome thought to the residents of this small Montanatourist town on the northeastern corner of Yellowstone National Park.
One wag even changed the sign leading into town by adding asingle letter, rechristening it ``Cooked City.''
``Thefire really took a toll on a lot of folks.
``Business was way down this fall because we didn't have thehunters, but we got a lot of curious weekenders from Cody andBillings who wanted to see how bad it was.''
``It was crazy for a while,'' said Mrs. Smith, 33.
``We got sentout twice.
The first time I grabbed all the photo albums but forgotour wedding pictures.
Theonly grocery store is on its winter schedule, open just Fridaythrough Monday, and many curio shops are shut up tight, but theBearclaw cabins and most of the other motels are open for wintersports enthusiasts.
Nearly four feet of snow has piled up against the Smiths' cabinsand `` that's just the way I like it ,'' exulted Mrs. Smith.
The state pays Bob Smith, 34, to groom the trails.
Because ofthe heavy day use, Smith works mostly at night in subzerotemperatures.
His wife keeps track of him by walkie-talkie.
This winter, Mrs. Smith also has a newproject.
``I've got the whole story right here in this box,'' said theamateur historian.
``Of course, a lot of it is wrong.''
Nationwide, it was the second worst wildfire season since thegovernment started keeping records.
Although the 5.9 million acresburned in 1988 did not match the 28 million acres destroyed in 1926,the $583.8 million spent to fight 75,000 fires set a record.
``Are there still smoldering embers out there deep in the rootsof the trees?''
wondered Mrs. Smith.
``Could the fires survive thewinter and pick up and come at us again?''
Park officials and fire experts have asked themselves the samequestions.
Rod Norum, a fire behavior analyst with the National ParkService, said he would not be surprised if pockets of fire are foundin the greater Yellowstone area come spring.
``It's not the sort of thing to be concerned about, it would onlybe a matter of curiosity and interest because the fires are stillunder suppression orders and they would be mopped up and put outimmediately , I'm sure,'' said Norum, who is based at the BoiseInteragency Fire Center in Idaho.
When the snow melts in May, the Yellowstone country will providean answer to a question troubling lots of people whose lives werechanged by the wildfires of '88.
Tad Bartimus is the AP Mountain States regionalreporter, based in Denver.
