.
.
.
It doesn't look good."
But since then, the annual rainfall here has averaged only 11.57 inches.
He said healthy trees repel the insects with a flow of pitch that suffocates them and forces them out of the bark.
Rowley said the insects have proliferated, killing vast stands of pines and leaving tinder-dry fuel for fires.
The fungus, first observed about eight years ago, attacks broad-leafed plants such as mountain lilac, manzanita and sumac, some of the more fire-resistant species of brush.
And because of the drought, even the live brush is more incendiary than usual, officials said.
Capt.
Scott Franklin, a vegetation management officer with the county Fire Department, said the dead trees and dry brush combine to form a fuel source so volatile that "any ignition now could become a major fire. "
Fire officials generally have responded to the threat with increased training and requests for federal money to pay for extra firefighting personnel.
Each densely thicketed acre of hillside chaparral contains about 60 tons of brush, he said, and that 60 tons has about the same fuel energy as 3,750 gallons of gasoline. "
Then, if you put 80 m.p.h.
The county Fire Department map shows that the most threatened residential areas include a number of hillside and canyon communities within the city of Los Angeles, including parts of Baldwin Hills, Hollywood, the Los Feliz district, Tarzana, Encino, Sherman Oaks, Sunland and Sylmar.
Especially threatened suburban communities include portions of Rolling Hills, Rancho Palos Verdes, Beverly Hills, Glendale, Pasadena, Altadena, Arcadia, Monrovia, Bradbury, Duarte, Azusa, Glendora, Claremont and Whittier.
Doug Allen, a fire prevention officer with the state Division of Forestry, said residents should clear tall grass, brush, trash, firewood and other combustibles at least 30 feet from any building.
What You Can Do  Fire officials have a number of recommendations for residents of areas where the wildfire danger is high: Clear brush and grass a minimum of 30 feet away from any buildings.
Do not not store firewood, trash or other combustibles within 30 feet of any building.
Exhaust sparks and hot mufflers start many wildfires.
Do not use an indoor fireplace that is not equipped with a spark-arresting device.

