Introduction:The smoke has cleared a little.
It would give law enforcement authorities time tocheck the buyer's background.
Advocates of tougher controls on guns were jubilant about their victory overstubborn resistance by Republican senators from western states such as Idahoand Alaska, who have long opposed any restriction on gun ownership in theUS.The Brady bill's opponents in Congress say it will inconvenience onlylaw-abiding citizens, not criminals who buy or steal their weapons away fromthe government's prying eyes.
For instance, one newspaper reporter successfullyobtained a dealer's licence for his dog by submitting a made-up socialsecurity number.
Despite its uncertain effect, passage of the Brady bill is read by some as asign that the tide has turned decisively in favour of gun control.
This is prized by somegame hunters for its killing power but detested by emergency room doctorsfor the damage it inflicts on humans as it mushrooms on impact.
The fear of violent crimes such as carjackings and drive-by shootings hasspread even beyond the inner city and into the suburbs and the countryside,provoking a widespread feeling that something - anything - must be done.
The message from an outraged public is not, however, unequivocally in favourof gun control.
Many new membersand gun owners are women.
Voters were swayed by economic considerations and particularly by hisfirst-term tax increase.
While such results do not indicate that the NRA has been routed, they haveput the association on the defensive.
Most members now favour some form ofgun control, but the core membership opposes all restraints on the sale offirearms.
''The second amendment is not about duck-hunting.
In the 1990s, it is aboutself-defence,' says Mr James Jay Baker, the NRA's chief Washington lobbyist.
Mr Neal Knox, sacked from alobbying position with the NRA in the 1980s but now one of its electeddirectors, argues that the second amendment is the citizen's 'freedominsurance plan' against tyranny.
In the process they havelost touch with many of their members, who back gun control in general andspecifically the Brady bill.
Two trends over the past few years have weakened the advocates of gunrights.
Second, the NRA's insistence on combating any gun control, even that viewedas reasonable by a majority not just of the US population but of gun-owners,has driven away some former political and police supporters.
Senator Denis DeConcini of Arizona, once voted the NRA's 'legislator of themonth', is backing a ban on assault weapons.
Delegate Clinton Miller of theVirginia state assembly, once rated 'A+' by the NRA, now calls theorganisation's top members 'hateful, spiteful, arrogant'.This alienation is apparent among gun-owners at large.
Some Americans may move in this direction, but many more may put their faithin self-defence and buy their own weapons.
