Abimael Guzman, founder of the rebel movement, has said of theslums and their people: ``The immense masses of the shantytowns arelike belts of steel that lock in the enemy and hold back hisreactionary forces.''
His Maoist rebels, once secretive fanatics, are becoming apolitical force that seeks public support in Huaycan and the othermakeshift communities where two-thirds of Lima's 7 million peoplescrape along.
About 10,000 people live in Huaycan.
Their huts built of strawmats line the bone-dry slopes of the Andean foothills 15 miles eastof downtown Lima.
Most residents are poor migrants from the violent highlands wherethe rebel movement was born.
In the cities, the guerrillas combine conventional politics withterror.
In the countryside, they make ever-bolder attacks on themilitary.
Rebel columns strike along the spine of the Andes from theEcuadorean frontier in the north to Bolivia in the south.
Theguerrillas also work with drug traffickers in Peru's eastern jungle,source of the raw material for much of the world's cocaine, and buysophisticated weapons with the profits.
The guerrillas are believed to have only about 5,000 armedcombatants, so they do not appear close to seizing power, but thereis increasing pessimism about the prospects of controlling them.
One reason the movement grows is its appeal to Peru's Indians,subjected for centuries to scorn and discrimination by the whiteruling elite.
Analysts and experts on counterinsurgency say Shining Pathappears bent on dominating the radical left of legal politics.
Officials have become alarmed by the broadening of tactics toinclude infiltration of legitimate organizations, including unionsof government workers.
They say this clouds distinctions between thelegal and illegal left, making it move difficult to combat the rebelmovement.
Followers call Guzman, 54, ``the fourth sword of Marxism'' afterMarx, Lenin and Mao.
It quoted Guzman as sayingin his first interview since going underground in 1980:   ``We had to follow the road from the countryside to the city.
Wemust prepare for the insurrection that is coming, which means thetaking of the cities.''
Guerrillas threaten and sometimes kill community leaders,establish ``people's schools'' and set up ``street theaters'' forpropaganda, it said.
Cardinal Juan Landazuri of the Roman Catholic Church said:``Priests tell me that young people in the shantytowns are goingover to Sendero.
Theindustrial zone contains 850 of the country's most importantfactories.
Red-painted slogans hailing the ``People's War'' and ``PresidentGonzalo,'' the rebel name for Guzman, cover the concrete-blockclinic, other buildings with solid walls and even large rocks.
Most factories are behind high walls topped with barbed wireand towers from which guards with automatic rifles keep watch.
Guerrillas killed three plant managers in 1988 who were involvedin labor disputes.
Union leaders also are uneasy.
End Adv for Sun Jan 8
