Introduction:IN BLOOD-RED letters, the sign on the front window of the Dealers Outlet gun store in suburban Phoenix declared: "Urgent!
Act Now!
Stop the Gun Ban!"
Inside, customers took time out from browsing through AK-47 assault rifles and a flock of other firearms to sign a petition -- and to vent their wrath at a local "turncoat," U.S. Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.).
"We are petitioning to protest the semiautomatic gun-control bills before Congress," read the text above a fast-growing list of names.
"I'm a one-issue voter, and I'm going to do everything in my power to take DeConcini out," George Hiers, a burly man on crutches, vowed as he bought a semiautomatic shotgun for his wife to defend herself with while he's away on hunting trips.
in a display of fury that represented far more than retaliation against a former supporter.
And most recently, the group found itself caught in the furor over assault weapons that was ignited by the massacre of five children in a Stockton schoolyard last January.
"Once you get into a (gun-control) rut, it's tough to get out of that rut."
Call Now!
Write Today!
"I don't want to see guns outlawed," Jonas said, "because I like to collect guns."
(Automatic guns fire 20 bullets or so per trigger pull; semiautomatics fire one bullet per trigger squeeze, but a fast index finger can get off as many as 20 shots in five seconds as ammunition is automatically reloaded from a clip.
And many semiautomatics can easily be converted to automatic weapons.)
In his letter, Baker called DeConcini's proposal a "tragic mistake," charging that it could even block sales of traditional hunting rifles and lead to criminal charges against 30 million sportsmen who own semiautomatic guns. "
Does anyone seriously believe (Senate Bill) 747 will stop drug smugglers .
.
.
who bring cocaine by the planeload .
.
.
Baker's letter asked.
.
.
.
"You could defend your farm or your ranch fairly well," he said.
McCoy's end of the conversation went this way: "You're misinterpreting the legislation.
.
.
.
Recall election?
I think that will hurt everybody and not help anybody.
.
.
.
You think that by attempting to burn your friends you can .
.
.
Metzenbaum is going to come from somewhere out of left field."
Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum (D-Ohio) is pushing a ban that is much broader than DeConcini's.
But DeConcini was also careful to take political cover behind two Republicans who are NRA "Life Members."
He noted Bush's import ban and cited a salty declaration by Barry M. Goldwater, Arizona's venerable former senator, that semiautomatic guns "have no place in anybody's arsenal.
If any S.O.B.
can't hit a deer with one shot, then he ought to quit shooting."
Gen. Edwin) Meese on banning plastic guns.
They said their membership and revenues fell off.
.
.
.
Now they need to get members and money, and that's why they're doing this to me.
.
.
.
If I weren't a mature person, I'd say, 'Up yours.
Now I'm going to be a gun-control advocate, and you're going to lose me.'
A subcommittee was getting ready to vote on a bill that would ban a list of semiautomatic assault weapons, and Hammer had asked to speak against it.
Attacking the crux of the bill, Hammer told the subcommittee: "You cannot differentiate between semiautomatic firearms that look menacing and your routine sporting firearms because, functionally, they are the same."
That is, the ban would cover not just the targeted guns -- the ones with folding stocks that make them easy to conceal, pistol grips, huge ammunition clips and flash suppressors that, according to police, make it easy to spray bullets from the hip.
But doomed as well, she claimed, would be firearms of traditional design long used by hunters and target shooters in one of the nation's gun-owningest states.
"Taking away firearms from law-abiding citizens who have lawfully owned them for decades is not the solution" to violent crime, she declared.
The action was so sweeping that many Sunshine Staters thought that they had been freed to carry guns openly, Wild West-style.
The Legislature later closed that seeming loophole in the wake of widespread hoots about the "Gunshine State."
But it left intact all other provisions, including one making it much easier in many areas to obtain a concealed-weapon permit.
Once, she threw a party at a firing range for legislators, aides, spouses and children; hundreds feasted on shrimp and oysters, and many took shooting lessons from expert instructors.
Despite her past successes, however, the House panel voted 5-1 to pass the assault-weapons bill along to the full Criminal Justice Committee.
Grant Jr., a conservative Tampa Republican who heads a companion Senate committee, was being interviewed about prospects for an assault-weapons ban.
Hammer explained later that Grant was referring to a newsletter in which she had said that a bill in his committee "sets up a modern-day Gestapo movement" because it threatened to invalidate many concealed-weapon permits.
"I wasn't calling members of that committee Gestapo," she maintained.
Nevertheless, Grant was so enraged that he had an aide call NRA officials in Washington to demand her removal.
State Sen. George G. Kirkpatrick Jr. (D-Gainesville) protested in an interview that he had been savagely attacked by Hammer's group in his latest campaign despite a "strong pro-gun" voting record.
"They wrote the most vicious letters," he said.
Kirkpatrick, who easily won re-election, predicted that such tactics will backfire. "
Said Hammer: "He's very bitter, but I have a job to do.
We have a right to vigorously oppose anyone whose actions are detrimental to our best interests."
Horn gave legislators a booklet picturing both the 27 guns proposed for banning and other semiautomatic rifles that were not on the list but that are popular with hunters.
Eventually, Hammer was able to minimize her losses.
Instead of banning assault weapons, the Legislature in June created a commission to study them.
And, instead of enacting a seven-day waiting period for gun buyers, as sought by Handgun Control, it required dealers to make a less-comprehensive background check by telephoning a police computer.
Voters will decide next year whether to accept a three-day waiting period.
Although a Handgun Control news release declared, "Florida Deals NRA Fourth Loss of Year," Hammer was able to say with some justification, "I think we did pretty good."
Rambo Sells
"I want this carefully fly-specked" for mistakes, he told a secretary as he left for lunch.
"You don't need any particular gun.
You don't need to hunt.
But I don't think you should have to justify anything in terms of need.
That's a socialist concept.
You ought to be able to own within reasonable limits what you want.
Cassidy said a number of concerned NRA members wrote him, asking, "What are you going to do about this?"
He wrote back, asking, "What do you want me to do?
I can't recall him, he's out of office -- he's an American legend."
It looked for all the world like Rambo's personal gun."
"Ah," came the response, "but they sell."
Korologos commented: "Never mind it doesn't do us any good on Capitol Hill to have those damn things loose."
"We may be branded as traitors, but that's the nature of the game in this town, to forge agreements and compromises," said the source, who requested anonymity.
The organization's revenues last year included $45.4 million from membership dues and $9.4 million from contributions.
They shouldered pea-green SIG assault rifles.
They clicked the triggers of super-light Glock 17 pistols.
They marveled at new laser targeting devices that can project a red beam hundreds of feet, from gun to bull's-eye.
"Dear God, Creator of all ... "Please give us the direction to make (gun-control advocates) understand that the actions of criminals, who should be confined, should not be dramatized into legislation that will impose on the rights of millions of law-abiding citizens to own and bear arms for lawful pursuits of recreation and self-defense.
"Amen."
The news media, the grizzled hero of two wars said, "have a million reasons for us not to have guns.
But look at what happened in Germany when ol' Hitler did a good job in disarming the nation.
The 1,200 diners leaped up, roaring.
For an army of crusaders besieged, it was just the rousing send-off needed for the tough battles ahead.

