Introduction: The 80,000 men and women who battle the nation's wildfires have always known their lives were endangered by flames or heat or falling debris.
But now, two new studies show they also face an unseen hazard: Their health is under siege from the poisonous stew of gases and soot in wildfire smoke.
Among the culprits are carbon monoxide, which slows reaction and impairs judgment; microscopic particles of carbon that lodge in the lungs; aldehydes and acids that irritate air passages, and hydrocarbon-based substances and other chemicals that can damage genes and cause cancer, tests show.
Wildland firefighters, whose only protection is the cotton bandanna covering their faces, lose as much as 10% of their lung capacity after one routine season, and the damage persists for weeks, according to the studies by the California Department of Health Services and the Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health in Baltimore.
Combined, the researchers tested the lungs of more than 100 California wildland firefighters before and after the 1988 and 1989 fire seasons.
After fires, they cough up black gunk.
"For some of the firefighters, the drop in lung function was rather striking."
The hazards are particularly acute in Southern California, which is prone to more large, smoky fires than anywhere else in the nation.
Its four-year drought has turned grasslands tinder dry, and its stagnant weather conditions and topography can trap smoke for days.
The Yosemite fires, which have scorched more than 15,000 acres and are still out of control, and the recent Santa Barbara and Glendale fires, which destroyed nearly 500 homes, are only the largest of hundreds of blazes in the state.
.
.
.
Because of the dryness, fires are burning more rapidly and more intensely."
But the U.S. Forest Service and state and county fire officials have been unable to protect their wildfire crews because they know of no gear light enough for firefighters to wear while hiking miles in burning terrain or effective enough to filter out the wide variety of toxic materials in smoke.
Furthermore, developing protection for the crews has gotten little attention and virtually no state or federal funding.
National fire officials say they cannot get help from Congress unless they can prove firefighters are dropping dead.
In all my 18 years of experience in industrial hygiene, I've never seen anything like it.".
In the past, firefighters believed their coughing and congestion were fleeting side effects.
The California health department's tests on 63 firefighters showed they lost as much as 10% of their lung capacity during one six-month fire season, with an average loss of 4%.
"But then it comes back.
And more often."
But he didn't know he would feel sicker and sicker every year.
"My lungs are probably shot.
"We're not surprised firefighters have decreased lung function.
Although the findings of the national studies have not yet been published, word has spread to top officials in the state Forestry Department, who say they are now starting to search for protection for the agency's 3,500 full-time firefighters and about 2,000 seasonal ones.
"We have to get on this right now."
Part of the solution is to develop lightweight and long-lasting respirators.
Developing technology, however, takes money, and none has been allocated by California forestry officials. "
Respiratory protection for wildland firefighters is non-existent.
His group, which includes all federal and state agencies involved in wildland firefighting, now gets less than half the research money it received 15 to 20 years ago.
This year, about $10 million, less than 1% of the federal dollars spent on fighting wildland fires, is set aside for research.
In what was called the "Siege of '87," 1,500 fires attacked the Klamath National Forest near the California-Oregon border in one month.
"We were miserable within hours of arriving.
Nose burning, throat burning, eyes burning.
Police officers at the camp, called in to direct traffic, were using flashlights at noon because they couldn't see 20 yards in front of them.
The crews slept in makeshift tents -- cotton sheets strung over clotheslines.
Ford questioned the firefighters about their health and was shocked by how many had alarming symptoms.
He listened to their chests, and heard wheezing in almost every one.
Immediately after the 1987 fires, Ford and other researchers from Johns Hopkins and the California health department mounted studies.
Looking back, he says, "When the adrenaline's pumping and you're saving property and lives and important natural resources, it seems worth it.
But when I retire and I'm coughing and gagging, it may be another story.
But I never did it.
I'm afraid he'll tell me there's really something wrong.
We're all afraid to do it.
None of us wants to know how much lung function we've really lost."
While the flames slowed, concern remained high over possible new lightning storms.
The Poisons: 1.
It also puts extreme stress on the heart.
2.
Inorganic Compounds -- Including lead and sulphur , these materials vary widely in smoke, depending on the content of the soil.
Lead, found in high concentrations in smoke from Southern California wildland fires, can cause neurological damage.
3.
Aldehydes -- These strong irritants, especially acrolein and formaldehyde, are found in high concentrations in smoke.
They are believed to cause much of the wheezing, coughing and eye irritation suffered by wild-land firefighters.
Many of them are also carcinogens.
4.
Particulates -- These small pieces of black carbon lodge deep in the lungs, possibly causing asthma, chronic bronchitis and cancer.
The smallest particles, which are the most dangerous to lungs, are found in smoldering fires, where firefighters spend most of their time.
5.
Ozone -- This potent chemical is formed during fires when there is strong sunlight and smoke is trapped by stagnant weather patterns.
Human tests show ozone, which is also the main ingredient of smog, hampers lung function, while animal tests indicate it can cause chronic respiratory disease.
6.
Organic Acids -- Including formic acid and acetic acid , these chemicals are powerful irritants to the lungs, eyes and throat.
Air Purifier: Fire crews at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory wear 1-pound air purifiers.
Gases such as carbon monoxide, however, are not filtered out.
National and state fire officials remain wary of the purifiers because they don't provide full protection from smoke.
Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons: These Compounds, believed to be cancer-causing agents, attach to particles of soot in wild-land fires.
Experts are uncertain whether the compounds cause genetic damage in blood cells.
