The police haddiscovered the house in one of Lima's affluent neighborhoodsjust two days earlier.
Is it makingprogress or losing ground among the population?
And finally,who is actually winning the war?
There are no easy answers.
There is not much of a dispute on the basic data, however.
Its first actions were cautious, modest andoften ludicrous in a crazy way (like hanging dogs fromlampposts, with scribbled insults over them to ChineseCommunist martyrs).
But the actions intensified and soonbecame quite lethal.
In October 1981, emergency laws were imposed for the firsttime on part of Peru; they covered only 2% of the population.
Now about 50% of all Peruvians live under emergency law.
In10 years, the war between the Shining Path and the governmenthas cost about 20,000 lives.
Damages are estimated at $16billion, or about 85% of Peru's annual gross nationalproduct.
If the armed forces have been rightly accused ofsystematic violations of human rights (Peru ranks as one ofthe world's worst human-rights offenders), the militaryfaults the civilian authorities for failing to providemuch-needed leadership.
Mr. Belaunde (the first to deal withthe problem), who tried to ignore the insurgency out ofexistence, is regarded as a well-meaning but inept leader.
In the first weeks of his mandate, he made several rightmoves -- like emphasizing his role as commander in chief ofthe armed forces and reorganizing the corruption-riddenpolice.
But things began to unravel soon after.
At first, hetried a liberal approach, looking for a dialogue with thefanatical Shining Path, and sending scores of youngprofessionals to the emergency areas to attack what he saidwere the "root causes" of the insurgency.
But dialogue wasdisdainfully rejected: Dozens of these professionals wereassassinated, and the armed forces slowed down their actions,while the rebels made largely unimpeded progress.
Then, Mr. Garcia tried a tougher approach, andhuman-rights violations surged to their current level.
Andfor the first time, death squads -- linked by some analyststo Mr. Garcia's APRA Party -- began to contribute to thekilling.
In 1988,1,986 people were killed as a result of insurgent orcounterinsurgent actions; in 1989, 3,198 were killed; and1,730 during the first six months of 1990.How well is Mr. Fujimori expected to deal with theinsurgency?
"{Themilitary} should mainly provide security for developmentprojects," Mr. Loayza says.
He learns fast," Mr.de Soto told me recently, "and he has all the rightinstincts.
"Even if Mr. Fujimori proves to be a quick learner, he willhave his work cut out for him.
It looked, said aPeruvian journalist, like the seed for the future "Museum ofthe Revolution" -- wood carvings; woven baskets; tapestries;paintings; chiseled stone; all meticulously, lovingly craftedwith the mythified motifs of the internal war.
A whole closed, inbred culture,developed in the underground and unnoticed by most Peruvians-- except when it explodes in their faces.
