Introduction: The tanker that caused the nation'sbiggest oil spill was being illegally piloted by its third matewhen the vessel ran aground on a reef, Exxon Shipping Co. saidSunday.
Exxon Shipping spokesman Brian Dunphy told The Associated Pressthat the captain of the tanker Exxon Valdez, Joseph Hazelwood, wasnot on the bridge at the time of the accident and that third mateGregory Cousins was in command.
``It's Exxon's policy that in the waters that the ship waslocated in, the captain should have been on the bridge,'' Dunphysaid.
``There's a problem there in that he was not there.
It's ourpolicy he should have been there.''
``He didn't have a proper pilot's license for that.
``I am unaware of any explanation he has made at this time.
...
As clean-up efforts continued Sunday, fishermen fearing lostincome sought compensation Sunday.
Exxon Shipping Co. held ameeting Sunday between fishermen and a company claims officer.
``We expect fullcompensation.''
Ten supertankers remained anchored 33 miles from Valdez, unableto move toward shore because the harbor remains closed.
Gov.
Steve Cowper declared Prince William Sound a disaster area,freeing state resources for cleanup and paving the way for afederal disaster declaration.
``It requires the most thorough response we canmuster and this disaster declaration is an important part of thatresponse.
We'll be requesting President Bush to make a similardeclaration.''
The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez, carrying 1.2 million barrelsof North Slope crude oil loaded at Valdez, ran onto a reef 25 milesfrom the port early Friday after swinging out of a traffic lane toavoid ice.
Valdez is at the southern end of the 800-mile Alaska oilpipeline.
Estimates put the spill at 240,000 barrels of oil, or about 10.1million gallons, making it the biggest U.S. spill on record.
Theonly larger oil-related accident in U.S. waters was the spillingand burning of up to 10.7 million gallons of oil when two shipscollided in Galveston Bay in 1979.
The Coast Guard estimated the area affected by the spill at 100square miles.
Alyeska operates the terminal at Valdezthat loads tankers with North Slope crude.
``We want to make sure we don't make any mistakes incleaning up the spill.''
The largestis 20-by-6 feet.
All six tanks along the port side remain intact.
Four are oiltanks; two are ballast tanks.
The ship's captain and twobridge crew members, including Cousins, were relieved of dutySaturday and subpoenaed by the NTSB.
The third member of the bridge crew was identified as helmsmanRobert Kagan.
The three were administered routine tests for drug and alcoholabuse, but the results were not immediately available, officialssaid.
The spill came at a time when Prince William Sound fishermenwere preparing for the herring season, which is followed byharvests of shellfish and salmon.
Many are concerned they will get only minimal harvests becauseof the oil damage, and then will face the longer-term problem ofbad publicity.
``Fishare not stupid.
But they can't avoid the chemicals.''
Rick Steiner of the University of Alaska Marine Advisory Programsaid the beaches on which the herring spawn could be polluted.
``Half of Cordova is operating on credit,'' Ott said.
