But the chief, who has remained steadfast through repeatedcalls from community leaders for his ouster, said later: "Idon't expect to just run away" from the job.
The Los Angeles Police Department has long been emulatedby others around the country because of its reputation forbeing efficient and corruption-free.
"The word is clear: the public expects highquality law enforcement within the parameters of the law."Mr.
"As troubling as some of our findings are .
.
.
they arenot unique to Los Angeles," said John A. Arguelles, vicechairman of the 10-member Independent Commission on the LosAngeles Police Department.
Over the years, thecity council and the mayor have been reluctant to even addadditional officers to the LAPD.
Of the six largest policedepartments in the U.S., the nation's second largest city hasthe fewest officers per thousand residents.
"The commission's recommendations will now be reviewed bythe City Council, which will weigh whether to adopt them inwhole or in part.
Ultimately, voters must decide severalissues, including whether to set term limits on the chief'stenure.
The commission intends to reconvene in six months toassess the progress.
The report "proves once and for all that theRodney King incident was not an aberration," said RamonaRipston, executive director of the American Civil LibertiesUnion of Southern California.
"Any fair reading of the reportconstitutes an `F' for {Chief Gates's} job performance.
One officer who hadseven complaints against him that had been sustained -- aswell as numerous others that hadn't been -- was described inhis performance evaluation this way: "His contacts with thepublic are always professional and positive and his attitudewith the citizens is one of concern.
"The report also reveals that racially derogatory remarksare made on an ongoing basis within the department; racistjokes and cartoons appear from time to time on bulletinboards in station locker rooms.
Sexism and homophobia abound.
Minority officers complain that whites dominate managerialposts within the LAPD, possibly contributing to theseproblems.
More than 80% of the black, Hispanic and Asianpolice officers in the force are in the entry-level ranks,the report said.
Headded that he has worked on his own to accomplish some ofwhat the commission suggested, but has often been stymied bybudget cuts.
There's alot of thoughtful recommendations."
And the chief said hewill stay to implement them.
The mayor, whoappointed Gates but lacks the authority to fire him, haspreviously called for Chief Gates's resignation.
