Almost.
There was the bluster, the bragging, the promise of big things to come.
This scene, which played out two weeks ago in Italy, was familiar, with one exception.
Overweening confidence among world class athletes is well accepted -- even expected.
However, part of the expectation includes the understanding that the athlete can back up the boasts.
"I think that is the attitude the public will display.
You hear grumblings among media types and in some circles of the sport, but you have to give the guy the benefit of the doubt. "
1 athlete in the sport was using drugs.
With the accolades cast upon him in the previous years, people were resentful.
With the humility and shame that has been reflected on him, people tend to be more open minded about it.
They hope the guy comes back clean and fast."
Clean and fast.
"I have been training very hard recently.
I am at 90% right now.
By strengthening training, I will be 100% by January.
I have decided to start again to show everybody I'm still the best.
"You'll get people who don't care about track, and you may attract back people who have quit coming to track.
It's been struggling.
Ben sort of transcends the sport, and, God knows, we need someone to transcend the sport."
His value in Europe and Japan has not waned.
But American meet directors say they can't pay that kind of money, especially for an unproven runner.
But how well he's running will determine his value.
That's the key.
Whether he is worth as much after six meets, I don't know.
You're only as good as your last race, and the fans know that."
"There is a lot of interest in seeing whether this fellow is a truly great runner or if he is what Carl Lewis said he is, a fair runner who got there by taking drugs," Schmertz said.
"I have no way of knowing.
If you give him $10,000 and people are beating him, you could have problems."
Already the backlash has begun.
There is talk of informal athlete boycotts in Canada, where indoor meets often provide car fare and little else to star athletes.
he said.
"There are very few secrets among athletes, especially when there's X dollars given to one athlete."
"My answer to that is 'Who puts (fans) in the seats?
Right now, I can't think of anybody who would arouse as much interest as Ben Johnson. "
There has been damage to the sport and people want to blame Ben personally for that damage," Gaines said.
"We are very cognizant of the fact that people are looking upon his return with something like skepticism and animosity.
To what extent, we don't know."
Franken said he had meetings with his sponsor, Sunkist, to discuss the possible image problem.
Schmertz, too, has given the matter some thought.
"I've had that thought myself, paying him that much money," he said.
"He was the greatest sprinter in history, then he was caught.
He probably thinks he can be paid more because of the notoriety.
I don't know how the public is going to react.
Are they going to treat him as someone who has paid his penalty and now he's clean?
I don't know.
These questions have gone through my mind."
"It's kind of perplexing, isn't it?," Kern said.
"I'm not God.
"I will never allow it to happen," Primo Nebiolo, president of the International Amateur Atheltic Federation, said Sunday.
"We do not allow two-horse races."
He has been an outspoken opponent of drug use and has spent the last year speaking to children, warning them against performance-enhancing drugs.
Francis is no longer his coach, having been replaced by Loren Seagrave, former women's coach at Louisiana State University.
We don't need any more media."
The COA will meet on Friday and is expected to lift the ban.
Any trace of them in their former countries disappeared.
They no longer existed.
Not only did he have to give back the gold medal, but he lost two world records, causing the sport to change its rules in order to take them.
The rule stripped Johnson of his world record of 9.83 in the 100 meters and 6.41 in the indoor 60 meters.
Already gone was the 9.79 race from the Olympics.
The records are gone but not forgotten.
Meet promoters are willing to pay to find out.
I don't know, but people are willing to find out."

