All of our family is going togo through the program to make sure that if we have it that we'll dosomething about it.''
Twelve million Americans have some form of diabetes, but it ismost prevalent among minorities, especially Native Americans, blacksand Hispanics.
Hispanics are three times as likely to developdiabetes as the general population, and 40 percent of the 700,000victims in Texas are Mexican-American.
More than 150,000 Americans die from diabetes each year; another150,000 deaths are diabetes-related, according to the AmericanDiabetes Association.
In obesediabetics, the body has too much insulin because it is burning morefats than sugars.
Type I diabetes usually develops among adolescents and requiresthat they have daily injections of insulin.
A genetic marker might identify people who are susceptible, whichcould lead to a screening test, he said.
``Then you could go out andzero in on the genetic susceptibles and you can be more intense onyour recommendations to them and you could also study that group.''
``But the interesting thing is that upper-incomeMexican-Americans do not have the same risk as low-incomeMexican-Americans.
``Also, Mexican-Americans tend to have more body fat in theirupper torso and we can see that as related to diabetes.''
Researchers believe that poor Hispanics' diets of cheap,processed foods, lack of exercise and infrequent medical attention _either due to poverty or a cultural bias against doctors _ increasestheir risk of acquiring diabetes.
The study is in its follow-up stage, to see if diagnosed diabetespatients have changed their lifestyle and have sought medical care.
She was told that because ofher weight, 254 pounds, she had hypertension and was at risk ofdiabetes.
Doctors put her on a strict, low-fat diet and she lost 26pounds.
``Mymother has diabetes and they tell me I might have diabetes, too, butI don't know too much about it.
``I feel OK, but they tell me that one year you can be OK and thenext year, it can be totally different.''
``The problem with Type II diabetics is not that they don't makeenough insulin; they don't respond to the insulin,'' DeFronzo said.``What we'd like to do is make them more responsive and this drugwill do that.''
The drug is widely used in Europe, Canada and Mexico and shouldbe approved by the Food and Drug Administration in several years forU.S.
use, he said.
``Ifyou have a 65-year-old mother who weighs 220 pounds and you tell herto go out and jog five miles Monday, Wednesday and Friday, she isgoing to laugh at you.
``So you have to design an exercise program that is compatiblewith the patient's lifestyle and it is something they can do.
''
