Introduction: A stone's throw from the smelly Smithfield meatmarket is an office building complex with no sign or anything toattract the attention of Londoners hurrying by.
Mounted cameras, jumpy guards and heavy doors keep out theuninvited.
The gold-colored interior is hushed and luxuriouslydecorated.
This is the Central Selling Organization, London-based marketingarm of the De Beers diamond empire, controlled by the wealthyOppenheimer family of South Africa.
Its experts sort mounds ofrough diamonds constituting 80 percent of the world's annualproduction.
But scratch the surface of this secretive world, and the diamondbusiness loses some sparkle.
Sales have declined sharply, and the 56-year-old cartel isfacing pressure to give producers better terms and allow them tosell more of their own gems.
Although its prosperity and control of the world diamondindustry looks unchallengeable, the pressures could loosen its gripand crimp its profits.
The decline was sharpest in the second half of the year, whensales fell 24 percent from the first six months.
``There was a very definite, noticeable slack in demand,'' saidanalyst Peter Miller of Yorkton Securities Inc. in London.
The organization must this year renegotiate five-year contractswith Botswana, the second biggest diamond producer in terms ofvalue, and Argyle Diamonds of Western Australia, the biggestproducer in terms of quantity.
The organization sells most of the Soviet Union's West-bounddiamonds, but the Soviets, the biggest value producer, have beenacting more independently and squeezing the cartel's margins, theexperts say.
Zaire returned in 1983 after a two-year split.
Angola, whichbroke in 1985, has been negotiating its re-entry.
``We are as strongly in control of the diamond market as we havebeen for many years,'' said Tim Capon, the cartel's director.
It reveals few details about security.
Ten times a year, at sales called ``sights,'' the clientsare offered a selection of diamonds chosen by the organization andplaced in a simple cardboard box.
The buyer basically can take itor leave it.
Of all diamonds mined, only 15 percent will end up in jewelry,but these represent 80 percent of the value of the world's diamondproduction.
The organization is fighting the lackluster sales trend bytrying to create new demand.
Last year, it spent $160 million onadvertising and promotion, trying, for example, to boost purchasesof men's diamond jewelry.
Today, diamonds remain ``the gem of gems,'' althoughmillions of people own them.
So far, it has succeeded.
While other commodities markets havesuffered repeated convulsions, rough diamond prices haven't fallensince the organization started announcing price changes in 1964.
But producers criticize the organization's secretiveness andwhat they call its arbitrary valuation system.
Some want more ofthe industry's millions of jobs relocated in their own countries.
After reviewing a complaint filed by theBritish mining company Consolidated Gold Fields PLC alleginganti-competitive practices, Britain's Office of Fair Tradingdecided in August against formally investigating whether theorganization abuses its monopoly.
Gold Fields acknowledged the complaint was a defensive maneuveragainst a hostile, and ultimately unsuccessful, takeover bid fromOppenheimer-controlled Minorco SA last year.
He died in 1957 and wassucceeded by his son, Harry Oppenheimer, who has made the companymore internationally minded and therefore less vulnerable.
