The scorched hillside around him appears utterly lifeless.
The fire was so intense that a gray shadow on the forest floor is all that remains of a fallen log.
His eyes red from the blowing ash, Mr. Despain patiently counts the quarter-inch lodgepole pine seed "wings" within a rectangular frame he places on the hillside.
The little wings act like the rotary blades of a helicopter in dispersing the seeds.
"This is amazing," says Mr. Despain, reflecting on his count.
Only about 500 mature trees were on an acre of hillside here before the fire.
Of course, not all the seeds will become trees.
Deer mice will eat some of them.
Others won't take root.
But next spring many of the seeds, fertilized by nutrients leaching into the soil from the snow-packed ash, will sprout, along with a bouquet of grasses, flowers and shrubs, as burnt areas of the park erupt with life.
The profusion of pine seeds is just one of the rejuvenating forces at work in Yellowstone even as the fires, largely quenched this week by rain and snow, still smolder.
Next year, the ground cover replacing the park's burnt stands of aging lodgepole pines should provide a 30-fold increase in plant species.
More edible plants, in turn, support larger, and more various populations of birds and other animals.
"We see what's going on here not as devastation and destruction, but, rather, rebirth and renewal of these ecosystems," says John Varley, Yellowstone's chief of research and Mr. Despain's boss.
In recent years, environmentalists have for the most part succeeded in promoting the natural processes of the parks.
But the approach is again under attack.
Reforestation would give wooded areas in Yellowstone a "five-year jump" on natural regrowth of the woods and would "get it green again," says John Davis, Willamette Industries Inc.'s general manager for Western timber logging operations in Lewiston, Idaho.
In an average year, 2.5 million tourists visit the huge park, and a drop-off because of the fire damage could severely hurt business.
In August, with fires out of control, the tourist trade was off 30% here.
"When I hear the word 're-vegetation,' my blood runs cold," he says.
Mr. Despain joined the park's research department in 1971 after finishing his doctorate at the University of Alberta on the plants of the Bighorn Mountains in northern Wyoming.
Alston Chase, an author and park critic, describes Mr. Despain as one of the park's "most orthodox believers" in the official natural management policy.
Within these 15-by-25-meter plots, he and other researchers cataloged the size and the number of lodgepole pines, as well as the variety of plant growth on the forest floor.
Fire licked at its corners even as he was mapping the trees within.)
Next spring he will chronicle rebirth.
Television pictures of the Yellowstone's fires at their height made things look worse than they are.
True, fire boundaries within the park cover about half the park's acreage.
In fact, nearly half the area within the fire zones remains untouched by fire.
The burnt "snags," as charred tree trunks are called, creak in the wind above Mr. Despain and are all that remain of a forest section that sprouted after a fire swept through here about the time of the Civil War.
Grasses and shrubs, some of their seeds having lain dormant for 100 years or more, fill in the open spaces between the trees.
The ground clutter thickens, more trees fall, and, with the help of a prolonged drought, the old forest creates its own funeral pyre.
"Fires have been an integral force in the Yellowstone ecosystem for the past 10,000 years since the glaciers left," Mr. Varley says.
Mr. Despain takes a Swiss army knife from his pocket and digs into the forest floor.
The top layer of the sandy brown soil has been seared by flames.
But less than an inch beneath the surface the searing stops.
For the first five years after a fire, while surrounding vegetation is still relatively low, there will be a proliferation of wildflowers in the park, she says.
Aspen trees, whose paper-white bark and yellow leaves punctuate the evergreen forests this time of year, also thrive after a fire.
Yellowstone's meadows rebound the fastest after a fire.
Forests visited only by ground fires will rebound almost as quickly.
Shrubs and grasses cover what is left of the burnt undergrowth, although fire scars will be visible on some trees for years.
The completely burned forests will remain a mixture of meadow and snags for several years.
Lodgepole pine seedlings grow as much as a foot a year in the open, although a few inches per year is more common at first.
Hundreds of plant species proliferate after a fire until "canopy closure" is achieved in about 40 years.
The mature forest "has the least biological diversity of any habitat in the park," Mr. Varley says.
Among the new arrivals may be the three-toed and blackbacked woodpeckers, the mountain blue bird and the Western wood phoebe.
Yellowstone's elk and bison herds, as well as moose, should benefit from the additional forage in the park next year.
More winterkill among the herds might be expected this year in any case, since animal populations are now near their historical upper limits.
They have called for the resignation of William Penn Mott Jr., who heads the park service.
So far, Mr. Mott, who didn't return calls for comment, doesn't appear in danger of losing his job, park service officials say.
But Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel says he favors certain, unspecified changes in the natural-burn policy.
Congressional hearings are also likely.
These and the rest of the park's thermal features remain unscathed by the fires.
A quarter moon was visible as well.
At exactly 7:24, as predicted by the sign in the window of the tourist-information office, Old Faithful sputtered once, twice and shot plumes of white steam high into the fading light.
Tourists will be back next year for this .
.
.

