Arecent Gallup survey found that 70% of House Members opposethe idea of limiting the number of congressional terms, whilethe public backed the idea two to one.
The rest of the country is frustrated with alegislature where the turnover is about that of thenon-elected British House of Lords.
The idea of limiting terms is overwhelmingly popular withAmericans regardless of party, ideology or income.
"The message is clear.
Dissatisfaction with Congress is almostuniversal.
The root of the problems with Congress is that, barringmajor scandal, it is almost impossible to defeat anincumbent.
Take Republican SenatorLarry Pressler's latest mailing to South Dakotans.
Itcontains five pictures of the Senator and mentions his name29 times on four pages.
Last year, Mr. Pressler sent out morethan 2.8 million pieces of mail, the equivalent of 10 piecesper household.
Critics of term-limits say that -- franked mail or not --it's wrong to blame Congress for the now nearly 100%re-election rates since it is just as easy to vote against anincumbent as for.
This presumes that voters can find out who the othercandidate is.
That takes money, andskewed campaign finance laws combined with taxpayer-paid junkmail effectively mean that only incumbents have the cash tomake themselves known and to be taken seriously by the media.
Some complain that limiting terms would infringe ondemocracy by not allowing voters to elect whom they please.
The polls indicate voters by two to one think the only waythey can control Congress effectively is by limiting terms.
Getting incumbents to reduce the advantages they havevoted themselves is something like asking banks to leavetheir vaults unlocked.
As late as 1860, theaverage length of House service was four years.
Inthe current House it is 8%.Term limitation, once the accepted American tradition, hasbeen replaced by congressional careerism.
The opinion pollsfor term limitation show that the voters don't like thechange.
They now think the voluntary service limitation ofthe past must be made mandatory.
