Introduction: How can 6,000 civil servants, mostly based in Washington, best promotedevelopment in the Third World?
More than 110m Third World children lack access even to primary education.
Horrific inequality abounds.
In Mexico, life expectancy for the poorest 10per cent is 20 years less than for the richest 10 per cent.
Most reports are mixed. '
It is not an impressive bureaucracy,' saysMr John Williamson, a senior fellow at the Institute for InternationalEconomics. '
Although nowwell-liked (partly for championing causes such as women's rights in theThird World), many observers say he never fully recovered from a rocky startinvolving a divisive internal reorganisation of the bank.
Histhird, one might add, will be quickly to establish his independence from theUS Treasury which always browbeats a newcomer.
In spite of recentprogress in a few countries, such as Mexico, the past decade has been one ofrelative failure.
Many Third World countries have gone backwards.
The biggest drag on growth is the huge debt accumulated in the 1970s andearly 1980s.
Many optimists see the debt reduction strategy launched by MrNicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary, in 1989, as a 'final solution' tothe debt crisis.
Under the plan official agencies assume some of the burdenof developing countries' private debts on condition that they implementmarket-oriented economic reforms.
In the long run it willbe impossible to isolate Poland,' he says.
'It is not so much more deservingthan other countries.
'But why was a Brady-type solution not launched much earlier?
For most of the1980s, the First World doggedly refused to consider debt forgiveness.
(The IMF was equally short-sighted.
The main innovation of the 1980s was a switch fromproject lending to 'structural adjustment' lending.
Making financeconditional on structural reforms was supposed to transform the economicperformance of developing countries.
But studies indicate the results have been fairly unimpressive.
Professor John Toye, director ofthe Institute for Development Studies at Sussex University, recentlycompleted an exhaustive analysis of bank programmes.
On average programmes have reducedbalance of payments gaps, had a negligible impact on Gross National Productand led to falls in the ratio of investment to GNP.Mr Feinberg calls the decline in investment the 'great shortcoming ofstructural adjustment lending in the 1980s'.
He says thebank was naive to expect entrepreneurs to respond to the austerity ofadjustment by increasing investment.
How can the bank do better in the 1990s?
One problem is that it has lostleverage over many Third World governments.
The maturing of bank programmesand the failure to expand lending much in the 1980s has led to a markedshrinkage in its net transfers to developing countries.
According to MrLawrence Summers, the bank's chief economist, net transfers over the nextfive years will be about Dollars 2 per person in the developing worldcompared with Dollars 9 (in current prices) in the late 1970s.
For the largenumber of countries that do not qualify for concessional loans, the net flowwill be negative.
Some analysts, including US Treasury officials, believe lacklustreperformance in much of the Third World reflects the inefficiency (andsometimes corruption) of governments.
It also says 60 per cent of EBRDresources must be devoted to the commercial sector - private businesses andstate concerns in the process of privatisation.
The World Bank operatesunder very different rules: its charter requires it to be non-political andonly its small affiliate, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), canmake direct loans to private businesses.
Such valuesare alien in many developing countries, but that does not imply they shouldbe denied the means for economic development.
If strict politicalconditionality had been imposed in the past, the bank could not have lent toa development star such as South Korea.
Most analysts, however, say the bank should tighten up a little.
Should a significant chunk of the bank's loans be made direct to the privatesector?
Sir William Ryrie, the head of the IFC, says the objective of a large volumeof public lending to the private sector is wrong-headed. '
Advocates of a switch to direct support of the private sectorare surely not arguing for public subsidies for Third World entrepreneurs;but if subsidies are ruled out, why should the bank's judgment of marketrisk be more reliable than that of private lenders in the west?There are alternative recipes for fostering faster Third World development.
During the 1980s the bank placed great faith in free market nostrums.
Itwanted to impose on developing countries policies that had become recentlyfashionable in the industrialised world.
But the notion that economicliberalisation alone is sufficient is increasingly questioned.
Ideas arecertainly important, but they do not build hospitals or schools.
More moneycould be made available: a mere 10 per cent cut in western defence spending,for example, would pay for a doubling of official aid.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Domestic investment as % of GNP                                  1975-82         1983-90All developing countries            26.7            23.6Africa                              26.4            19.4Middle East 26.3            23.4Latin America &amp; Caribbean           23.3            18.3Asia                                27.9            28.9 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source:
By region (Fiscal 1990)Billion dollars          Gross           NetSub-Sahara Africa 2.70           1.98Asia                      6.27 3.72Europe , Middle East andN Africa 2.57           0.39Latin America &amp; Caribbean 6.16           3.25 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source: World Bank -----------------------------------------------------------------------
