As a result, Peruvian Air Force troops carried out operations in the aforementioned area during the second week of April.
The operations, however, were unproductive.
The leadership may be wiped out completely or partially, but those leaders who are not must and can continue carrying out plans, the struggle, the people's war.
We were taught that the revolution will not stop, will not become paralyzed. "
The document even mentions what must be done with those who uphold peace and put down arms: "There are two reasons for surrendering: to surrender in view of local reaction and to surrender in view of international reaction.
This is always the case.
Its purpose is to ruin the revolution.
Those who surrender, therefore, are no good, and must be wiped out through fire and bloodshed."
(Preliminary Session of the Second Plenum).
The second point of the document of the Central Committee meeting presided over by "Feliciano" highlights the agreements of the Working Meeting of the Shining Path leadership held in August 1993, almost one year after Guzman was arrested, and during which the implementation of the agreements of the Third Plenum held in March 1992 was discussed.
During the working meeting, and in addition to approving the efforts to "step up investigations to determine the sanctions for those who are found responsible" for contributing to the arrest of Abimael Guzman, it was agreed, among other issues:   1.
To defend the life of "President Gonzalo" by widely preaching our ideology, by showing great courage, placing even our lives at stake, by keeping our red and invincible flag flying high, and by pursuing our unwavering objective: communism."
2.
3.
To reassert the three strategies: the political strategy: to conquer power; the military strategy: the people's war, to develop the war of movements and promote arrangements for the uprising of cities; and the construction strategy: to make arrangements to conquer power in the midst of the people's war.
The document addresses this aspect of the internal debate as: "About the Struggle Against the Counterrevolutionary Hoax and the Black Group that upholds a Right-Wing Opportunist Line (LOD)."
The Central Committee uses several arguments to "urge the smashing of the counterrevolutionary nonsense and the misbegotten schemes of Yankee imperialism, the genocidal and traitorous dictatorship, and the Black Group:"   1.
2.
It added: "The short-term objective of this scheme is to win the elections, prevent the commemoration of (Mao's) centennial in December 1994, and cover up the La Cantuta affair, but the final goal is to annihilate the people's war and move ahead with their plan to murder President Gonzalo."
3.
The Black Group is made up of "infiltrators, traitors, weaklings, and old revisionists, linked directly to reactionaries," meaning Osman Morote, Elena Iparraguire, Maria Pantoja, Martha Huatay, Edmundo Cox, and others who are in touch with government representatives and prison officials.
4.
The activities of the Black Group "go against the conclusions of the Marxist-Leninist-Maoist-Gonzalo's Thoughts First Congress (1988), the BUP, the leadership, the party, and the people's war, which means that its members have voluntarily strayed from the party."
Furthermore:   5. "
Actions that go against principles cannot be accepted" because "it is an international communist rule that the leadership (of the party and the war) cannot be exercised from prison," and because "monstrosities like the `peace accord'(...) clash with our principles."
Gonzalo's "leadership" was also accepted but, as he is operationally restricted, he cannot lead the party anymore.
This communique stated: "They are trying to separate `Gonzalo's Thoughts' from `President Gonzalo' the person.
Under the guise of defending the party, they are undermining it and its leadership so as to bring about its defeat, by using empty rhetoric to disguise their partisan, opportunistic, and personal interests and ambitions, and by taking a blind, biased, subjective, and superficial approach to concrete reality.
(...) We urge the eradication of these leftist ideas of military extraction."
The communique emphasized the decision to put an end to the people's war: "The people's war is over.
To continue it means sabotaging the peace agreement.
We warn our members against militaristic and revisionist approaches, and urge them to keep their eyes open to unmask this or any other scheme."
Such actions must be prevented to the extent possible, and immediately and categorically criticized."
Intelligence agents believe that the most likely targets are "financial companies, banks, stores, and industries, in order to sow confusion among local and foreign investors."
Government politicians and high-ranking members of the forces of order are also among the main targets.
The report explains that "Israeli experts in hostage rescue and underwater operations (demolition) have been hired for this purpose."

