Introduction:Of all the extravagant plans inspired by this week's solar eclipse, none beatsthe Earth Evacuation Project.
However, the chic hotspot for eclipse watchers won't be Mexico, but the big island of Hawaii, wherethe 18,000 tourists who would be there anyway to enjoy the sunshine will bejoined by an additional 30,000 or more coming to watch the sun go out for fourminutes.
Even more people might be there for the show, but for the lack ofseats on flights to the island.
This will also be the longest-lasting total eclipseuntil 2132, according to Alan Dyer, an associate editor at Astronomymagazine.
The midday eclipse will consist of a 160-mile wide lunar shadowspeeding at up to 5,000 miles per hour along the Earth's surface.
Whilemany Mexicans are looking forward to the event, some are quietly takingprecautions.
All are now booked up, and authorities fear competition at campsites.
Although Hawaii's isolation will limit the size of thecrowds, locals are still predicting problems.
"By God, there's just one roadon this island," a circle route that often narrows to two lanes, one shopowner said.
"It's going to be total insanity.
""We're worrying that wewon't have enough alcohol and food on the island," said the manager of a localrestaurant and disco called The Eclipse, named by coincidence 10 years ago.
Newspapers here are carrying frequentreminders not to stare directly at the sun.
During the eclipse, the mysticand the scientific will not be far apart.
As the moon passes over the sun, there are certain powervortexes here that are going to be opened up and awakened," she said.
AT IT; If you want to watch the moon's progress across thesun: Don't look at it.
Staring at the sun during a partial eclipse couldquickly -- without your feeling a thing -- burn into your retina a permanentimage of the crescent sun, causing severe and permanent vision loss.
It's safest to watch the eclipse indirectly by projecting the sun's imagethrough a pinhole and onto a sheet of white paper.
Other safemethods: (check) Pieces of arc-welders' glass labeled  14 and available atwelding supply stores.
Most welders' goggles are not suitable protection.
(check) Two or three layers of Mylar plastic heavily coated with aluminum.
Some stores are selling "eclipse glasses" made with this material.
How to watch it,including directions for a pinhole projector.

