Introduction:   Thousands of peoleprayed, cheered, danced, beat drums and observed other traditionstoday as a total eclipse of the sun darkened a wide area ofIndonesia and the southern Philippines.
A partial eclipse was visible across a wide area of Asia as farwest as India _ including Southeast Asia, China, Japan and NewGuinea as well as parts of Australia and the Pacific islands.
Scientists said the eclipse would end at sunset in the Gulf ofAlaska.
Richard Fisher of the High Altitude Observatory in Boulder,Colo., said that despite scattered clouds, scientists wereconfident they had taken useful pictures of the eclipse.
In Jakarta, Wilson Sinambela of the National Institute ofAeronautics said a total eclipse was observed in several parts ofthe country, including by about 1,000 tourists in the South Sumatracapital Palembang.
In Kurukshetra, India, an estimated 1 million pilgrims dippedinto the waters of the sacred Sannihit and Brahmsarover tanks aftera public address system announced the start of the eclipse.
Hymnswere chanted and conch shells blown during the ceremony about 90miles north of New Delhi.
Clouds blocked the first moments of the eclipse in GeneralSantos City.
But the cloud cover broke, setting off wild cheeringamong the thousands who watched the phenomenon in a scorchingtropical heat.
ThePhilippines is Asia's only predominately Christian country.
``This phenomenon is a clear reminder from God for mankind torepent its sins,'' said Theresa Teopengco, a government employee.
Scientists said the area afforded the best opportunity towitness and study the eclipse because skies are usually clear thistime of year.
Police said four people were injured when a passenger buscollided with a jeep during the eclipse.
``The drivers were probably looking skyward when the accidentoccurred,'' said policeman Ricardo Manansala.
``It's impossible togaze at the sky and drive a vehicle at the same time.''
Solar eclipses occur when the moon positions itself between theEarth and the sun.
