-- for "highly respected."
Rep. Tom Foley, a liberal Democrat from Washington State, calls him "a very strong asset" to the 151-nation institution "because of the enormous respect he has on both sides of the aisle."
After a year and a half in office, he has failed to move the bank into a leadership role on the Third World debt problem. "
The World Bank has been reluctant to step out on this issue in confrontation and conflict with the Treasury," charges Sen. Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat and Congress's leading voice on the debt problem.
Rep. John LaFalce, a New York Democrat and another leader on the issue, agrees.
House Democrats, in fact, cut out of the foreign-aid bill passed last month all $70 million the administration had sought for the first year of the U.S. share of the increase in capital.
The deletion was made pending action by a committee looking into the bank's approach to the debt crisis.
The bank has tried to help the countries by tiding them over with some new loans.
Other experts advocate a "debt facility" to buy and refinance the debts.
There is a lack of intellectual leadership within the bank itself."
While financial experts often urge the bank to do more, the ponderous institution has intervened only about half a dozen times in debt crises, usually just to guarantee a small portion of a commercial-bank loan package.
I'll tell you who'll pay for it: you and me when we file our 1040s.
It's a bad idea.
Because of "chronic debt problems .
.
.
Baker's approach has to be adapted to the circumstances of today," says the bank's No.
2 man, Operations Vice President Moeen Qureshi.
"Perhaps we have excessively underplayed our own role."
He adds, "It seems to me it will be desirable, in the present environment, to see what can be done" to reduce debt, rather than just lend new money.
The bank's own annual world-debt report illustrates its determination to stick to a back-seat role on the issue.
Founded in 1944, it has evolved into a well-paid bureaucracy of 6,000 working in 17 buildings a few blocks from the White House, ignored by tourists but a mandatory stop for finance ministers and bankers visiting Washington.
The bank earns more than $1 billion annually, sports a top credit rating in securities markets and lent nearly $18 billion last year.
The U.S. is its biggest shareholder and controls the president's job.
Under Robert McNamara, the bank began aiding efforts to alleviate rural poverty, control population growth and fight illiteracy.
Under A.W.
He has continued to increase the quick-disbursing, non-project loans but hasn't introduced any new type of lending.
He also has set a goal for alleviating poverty in Asia and has won new financing to help the poor countries of Africa.
He set up staffs to handle environmental and women's issues.
One of these is the "Safe Motherhood Initiative," a project designed to lower the high rate of deaths during childbirth, especially in Africa.
Funds will be increased for related health and nutrition programs.
"We have had a pretty good year," he says.
"We had a 100% support of our budget .
.
.
and we are well on the way toward a substantial general capital increase."
And, he adds, "I have changed a lot of emphasis in our programs."
"Who is calling the shots on debt policy in the administration?
The Treasury.
The Treasury," Sen. Bradley contends.
Bank staffers cite a loan to Chile last year over U.S. opposition.
The bank has accelerated lending to the 17 most heavily indebted countries.
But the new money is being swamped by interest payments, and commercial banks are putting up little new money of their own.
In 1986, the 17 nations paid back lenders $18 billion more than they got in new loans.
"We are not there to try and handle their short-term debt problems, and if you think we are, then I think you misunderstand the nature of this institution," he says.
"He had a strong identity here in Congress, which he earned.
He was created by Jim Baker and George Bush in this job.
His reputation now rests on how he defines himself."

