Introduction: Steep hillsides covered with trees and dense brush.
Narrow, winding roads.
Wood homes with shake roofs.
Uncertain water.
Now, in the wake of that firestorm, local firefighters are looking up atthe hills that surround this area and wondering not whether, but only when andwhere.
"Everyfire chief -- there's 12 of us in this county -- knows it's there.
In fact, the danger of an Oakland-like inferno is in almostall of the hills that ring the South Bay, where homes often are surrounded bydense brush or stately trees, the fuel of rapidly spreading wildfires.
Andthe risk is increasing, as cramped Bay Area residents push farther into thehills and canyons in search of living space and rural atmosphere.
Stateofficials say it's no coincidence that six of California's 10 most damagingwildfires have occurred since 1980.
"Those are the risks you take when you live in an arealike this," said Dean Lucke, chief of the forestry department's SanMateo-Santa Cruz ranger unit.
"We can't guarantee everyone's safety up here atall times.
If there's an area that hasthe significant potential for disaster, that's one.
"Codes rarely enforced;  In the hills, nearly every home is surrounded by thick brush or dense woods.
Instead, as they drive by, somefirefighters make mental notes about which homes would be worth saving.
"Combine that with panic, with people getting out of the way, andyou're setting the stage for disaster.
How would all those people escape?
In Oakland, water pressure dropped as electricity failures shutoff pumps and thousands of open hydrants and water connections quickly drainedreservoirs.
"We would face the samesituation," said Sharon Whaley, spokeswoman for the San Jose Water Co., whichserves foothill areas in Los Gatos, Saratoga and Almaden.
In rural areas,water supplies are even chancier.
But many of the most dangerous areas were built longbefore modern planning ordinances and building codes.
.
.
building code, they say, 'Don'teven bring it up,' " Landrum said.

