They press fingers under their noses.
His arm, contorted behind his back, finally snaps.
The law enforcement name for these techniques is "pain-compliance."
Demonstrators have alleged police brutality at least since Freedom Riders launched their sit-down strikes in Alabama almost 30 years ago.
This time, however, the outcry -- including the videotapes of police in action -- comes from anti-abortion protesters with Operation Rescue, whose members tend to see themselves as law-and-order conservatives.
Suddenly, some pro-choice liberals are as supportive of the police as conservative hawks were during 1960s demonstrations, while some anti-abortion Republicans are voicing the sort of "police state" rhetoric once associated with anti-war radicals.
"I think it's utter stupidity," Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates said.
"Utter, complete stupidity."
In reaction to the uproar, the LAPD is quickly phasing out the term pain-compliance, but not the techniques, which have been used "in civil rights demonstrations, student demonstrations, Vietnam demonstrations .
.
.
all through the '60s, all through the '70s," Gates said.
He smiled.
"You didn't hear any Republicans complain then, did you?"
His officers, he added, are as well-trained in the use of these holds as any in the country.
Deadly force is one extreme among the techniques officers must choose from in confronting suspected lawbreakers, explained Sgt.
Fred Nichols, the academy's expert on the use of force.
Another trick of the trade: the "mastoid lift," in which officers press the nerves along each side of the neck.
Demonstrated on recruits who had seated themselves like protesters on the Academy's playing field, each of these techniques worked promptly.
The gentlest twist triggered enough pain to make the recruit comply promptly.
Nichols is puzzled by those who call pain-compliance excessive force, or compare it to the cattle prods police use in South Africa.
Protesters are given every chance to move on their own.
Police actually plead with Operation Rescue demonstrators in some cases, he said.
Then "they're told they'll be subjected to excruciating pain.
"It's going to hurt.
That's what pain-compliance means."
"The first time pressure is applied, most people fall to the ground," Nichols said.
"With Right-to-Lifers, you feel something's rotten in Denmark.
You say, something's wrong here."
Operation Rescue protesters stand out, he said.
In either case, the results are dangerous, said McKinley.
"I'm no doctor.
It's telling you to stop doing what you're doing.
* In Pittsburgh, women claimed they were sexually molested by officers.
.
. '
Jesus!
Jesus!'
I've never been roughed up like that before.
Operation Rescue has not gone limp after its encounters with police.
But others said the LAPD had behaved with restraint.
The pain inflicted on women's lives by Operation Rescue people is enormous.
Chief Gates, an outspoken conservative, does not bask in this new-found support.
"I felt like the people in the stands were cheering as we threw the Christians to the lions," he said.
In fact, the emotional volatility of the abortion issue has shaken the way many think in the debate over police uses of force.
Village Voice columnist Nat Hentoff has skewered liberal civil libertarians for letting their ideology stop them from supporting anti-abortion protesters' fight to restrain what he calls "the torture police."
He also has charged that his media colleagues have turned their backs on the uncomfortably complex issue.
But you never know how tolerant you are until you're challenged on something you care about.
"All I want my officers to think of at the time that they're taking somebody into custody is the resistance to the arrest.
I don't want them concerned with abortions, nuclear freezes, saving the whales or whatever."
Los Angeles received almost $56 million in such grants in fiscal year 1989.
"This is what the Democrats used to do all the time, blackmailing cities into doing what the federal government wants it to do," said Gates.
"Now we've got Republicans doing it."
The Justice Department already investigates charges of police abuse, Gates pointed out.
But if this "horrendous" new measure has its intended effect, eliminating the use of painful control techniques in nonviolent demonstrations, his department may have no choice but to watch as demonstrators of any stripe take over any facility they choose, he said.
Carol Sobel, staff attorney for the Los Angeles Chapter of the ACLU, shares Gates' assessment that the government acted in this case because conservative lawmakers were sympathetic to the anti-abortion cause.
Still, she believes the new measure will help assure "that the cost of demonstrating in this town doesn't escalate.
I just hope conservatives remember that it includes everyone."
Jim Cady in the Times Editorial Library assisted in the research for this article.

