Introduction: How much more of an "investment" should American taxpayers make in the welfare system?
The bill proposes $5.2 billion in new spending over five years, and most of that will increase benefits currently received by welfare recipients.
The bill's questionable premise is that larger expenditures on welfare will reduce welfare dependency.
The proposed new spending on welfare should be viewed as an investment, say its proponents, led by Rep. Thomas Downey.
In short, the Family Welfare Reform Act amounts to an expanded investment in the status quo.
That might produce reprisals from voters who've watched their tax dollars build and maintain the welfare system, with little evident return on their investment.
Instead, after nearly 20 years, the system's defenders and funders repeatedly tell the public that the problem, if anything, has gotten worse.
In fact, while the level of AFDC benefits has decreased in real terms since 1970, the total level of all welfare benefits has not.
One-quarter receive housing assistance.
The House Democrats' claim that welfare recipients are worse off than they were in 1970 -- in terms of the level of benefits received -- is dubious.
Measured in the terms that really count -- namely the number of welfare dependents liberated from the rolls -- the situation has become worse.
During the unprecedented expansion of the welfare state, the most notable and highly publicized phenomenon has been the development of an entrenched class of long-term welfare dependents.
It is difficult to accept that the $4.3 billion increase in basic benefits proposed in the Family Welfare Reform Act will do much of anything about the problem of hard-core welfare dependency.
At the least, welfare reform should have these goals: to shrink rather than enlarge the welfare system, to ultimately eliminate perverse incentives to remain on welfare, and to make work the focus of the system.
The House bill doesn't do that.
By further increasing rather than gradually reducing the level of benefits available to recipients, it makes welfare more, not less, enticing.
This rare opportunity is being squandered.

