While little can be done to control the natural fires that occur in chaparral country, homeowners can change their approach to landscaping and help improve the chances of their homes and property surviving a brush fire.
Many of my clients lost property, but the fire jumped from house to house, then skipped others.
I realized that the landscaping had a relationship to the amount of devastation."
Dell, the Santa Barbara City Fire Department, the city government and a number of volunteers combined their efforts and began planning the Santa Barbara Firescapes Demonstration Garden to educate the public about reducing the risks of wildfire near their homes.
The garden is a model of how to design and maintain landscaping around the home to provide a line of defense against fire.
The garden is landscaped into four plant zones, with the most flammable vegetation planted farthest from the house.
Zone 4, farthest from the house, consists of native vegetation that has been thinned to reduce the amount of fuel that could feed a fire.
Zone 3 includes plants selected for their low profile and slow-burning characteristics.
Zone 2 features highly fire-retardant succulents.
It's designed to be a greenbelt zone of maximum fire protection.
Zone 1, closest to the residence, is a small area of plants that pose little risk of burning.
"If one of those lights up near your house, there's no way to save it.
And the Monterey pine -- it's so full of volatile oils, it's almost unbelievable. "
Actually, it can be a menace.
The plant produces a great deal of litter beneath that succulent surface and can smolder for days.
Suddenly, xeriscaping -- landscaping with drought-tolerant natives -- is becoming commonplace and fashionable.
The Firescapes Demonstration Garden is located across the street from City Fire Station 7 at 2411 Stanwood Drive and is open every day from 8 a.m. until sunset.
A brochure available at the garden aids your exploration.
To reach the garden: From U.S. 101 in Santa Barbara, exit on Salinas Street and continue to a five-way intersection.
Turn left and continue to the fire station, on your left, just opposite the garden.
There's ample parking at the station, which is located on the corner of Stanwood Drive and Mission Ridge Road.

