Introduction:BETHESDA, Md.
Soon hishandwriting changed.
His vision blurred.
Under a microscope, parts of his brain,riddled with little holes, looked like a sponge.
The plot revolves around a family of braindiseases, probably variations of a single disorder, calledspongiform encephalopathy.
It is infectious, invariably fataland as insidious as termites, sometimes eating away braincells for years without detection before a critical mass isspongified.
Then, over a few months, motor control bucklesand cognition crumbles.
Victims then die quickly, usuallywithin a year.
Now, after decades of detective work, medical sleuthsappear to be closing in on the molecular culprits behind thedisease.
Their dogged pursuit won't nail a public-healthenemy No.
1 -- the disease is rare -- but it may pay off in abig way because the findings could shed light on more commonkillers, including Alzheimer's disease.
The work alsopromises basic science breakthroughs.
Spongiform researchalready has raised questions about a cornerstone of biologyand spawned a Nobel Prize.
The uncanny nature of the disorder sometimes gripsscientists with a kind of obsessive fascination, notes NIHresearcher D. Carleton Gajdusek.
Recently the fascination hastaken on a more anxious cast as the disease has struck humansand animals with suspicious regularity in several places,underscoring a longstanding question: Do people get thedisease from animals?The question has burned with special intensity sincescrapie, the form of the disease in sheep, jumped to Britishcattle a few years ago after they were fed ground-up parts ofinfected sheep.
About 20,000 British cattle have beendestroyed since 1986 in hopes of eradicating the spongiform"mad cow" disease, which makes the animals jittery beforethey keel over.
A few weeks ago, the first confirmed case of mad cowdisease outside Britain turned up in Switzerland.
U.S. meatproducers have reason to be anxious about this because theincidence of scrapie has been rising in American sheep sincethe mid-1980s, says Richard Marsh, a University of Wisconsinscrapie expert.
Yet sheep have never been stronglyimplicated in cases of the human form of the disease,Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, or CJD.
When Dr. Mitrova, a researcher at a Bratislava medicalinstitute, heard of the unusual cluster of cases, she decidedto investigate.
From the first, one clue stood out like abloodstain: "Almost all of the people are involved in raisingand taking care of sheep," she says.
The local cuisineincludes a soup of sheep meat stewed in sheep milk.
Thearea's equivalent of chicken soup for colds is sheep brainfried in onions.
The outbreak has become something of anepidemic around the Orava area, where 26 cases have occurredsince 1987, a rate hundreds of times higher than normal forCJD.
Residents of the affected areas "are very afraid," saysDr.
Mitrova.
She has found evidence of scrapie in the area'ssheep.
"Gajdusek .
.
.
Soon kuru victims' brains started issuing from the heartof darkness to distant medical centers, compliments of Dr. Gajdusek.
Nothing helped.
The cause remained elusive.
Two years later, William Hadlow, a U.S. veterinarian, sawa picture of one of the kuru brains in a medical journal andwas struck by its spongy appearance.
Another link fell into place when Igor Klatzo, anNIH scientist, noticed kuru brains resembled ones from CJDvictims.
But the infectious agent continued to baffle scientists.
It somehow could hide in the brain for decades withoutcausing the usual signs of infection, such as fever.
Braintissue of infected animals could transmit the disease wheninjected into different animals' brains, yet microscopesrevealed no signs of infectious microbes.
Further studies showed the junkmainly contains a botched form of a naturally occurring brainprotein, sometimes called a prion.
Many scientists nowbelieve it's the culprit.
When formed in a brain cell, a molecule of such stuff mightbe "like a bad apple in a barrel converting all the otherapples," says the NIH's Dr. Brown.
Heinjected the ashy residue into animals' brains, expectingnothing to happen.
But a few of them got spongiform disease.
Eating huge doses ofthe agent is required.
Perhaps the mad cows got such doses"every time they went to the feedbag," says Dr. Brown.
Kuruvictims apparently consumed similar mega-doses.
Examining his brain, a veterinarian found a telltalesponginess, sparking another round of panic in the U.K. aboutspongiform disease.
Now more than 10 British cats have diedof it, suggesting brains from infected sheep or cows got intocat food.
Meanwhile, yet another spongiform outbreak has occurred,this time among northeastern Pennsylvanians.
They were all of Eastern Europeandescent, suggesting people of similar ancestry might carrythe gene.
Drs.
They grabbed a plane for Czechoslovakia.
"But there's nothing elseworth working on in science.
"
