``The worst thing we could have done early on was try to boomthe vessel.
We would have lost the vessel,'' said Exxon ShippingCo.
President Frank Iarossi.
Thick oil has floated over more than 1,640 square miles andsoiled 800 miles of beach.
Thousands of animals are known dead,including 30 sea otters.
Port officials there said theyweren't sure if they'd allow that, even though the $12 millionrepair bill would provide about 200 jobs.
``We're not willing to trade in the environment for jobs,''Portland port spokesman Darrel Buttice said Monday.
Oregon Gov.
Canadian authorities also asked Exxon for assurances there willbe no damage to the British Columbia coast if the tanker is towedto Oregon, and the mayor of Valdez said the ship was not welcomeback in the port where it took on the load of crude.
In Washington, Environmental Protection Administrator WilliamReilly said the spill could put the brakes on petroleum explorationthere and in other areas.
``We will take apart the environmentalplanning for every aspect of oil development in Alaska and in othersensitive areas where the environment potentially could bethreatened,'' he told a House appropriations subcommittee.
But after Long Island law enforcement authorities waited asecond day for Hazelwood to turn himself in, the Suffolk Countydistrict attorney's office announced there would be no surrenderthat day.
Hazelwood, 42, is accused operating the ship while under theinfluence of alcohol, reckless endangerment and negligent dischargeof oil.
Of about three dozen oil-soaked otters rescued following thespill, about one-third have died, Alaska Department of Fish andGame spokesman Jon Lyman said.
``Dozens of otters are dying beforerescuers can get to them,'' he said.
Six otters were flown to SeaWorld in San Diego on Monday for rehabilitation.
Fishermen counting on the sound's $12 million annual herringindustry were told Monday by the state that it will not allow aseason this year.
Sablefish and shrimp fisheries in Prince Williamwaters also have been closed.
The spill has shifted public opinion in Alaska about the energyindustry, which has been lobbying for new exploration.
U.S. Sen. Frank Murkowski, a champion of oil exploration inAlaska, asked that plans for drilling in Bristol Bay, the state'srichest fishing grounds, be set aside until the industry candemonstrate that it can respond effectively to spills.
