But Republicans said heshould not divulge his feelings about controversies that might come before thecourt.
Conservatives applauded the selection and predicted liberals wouldhave trouble opposing the black judge.
"The failure to give an answer may cause me and others to beunwilling to vote for his confirmation," Metzenbaum said on "CBS ThisMorning."Sen.
Arlen Specter, R-Pa., noted that Metzenbaum did not pressJustice David Souter during confirmation hearings about his position onabortion.
"I will not support yet another Reagan-Bush Supreme Court nominee who remainssilent on a woman's right to choose, and then ascends to the court to weakenthat right," said Metzenbaum, the only member of the Judiciary Committee whovoted against Thomas' nomination to the Circuit Court of Appeals to theDistrict of Columbia.
"The fact that he is an African-American should not be a basis for avoidingvery careful scrutiny of his civil rights record," said Julius L. Chambers,director of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund.
While someDemocrats immediately blasted the nomination, the party's biggest guns heldtheir fire.
SenateMajority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine; and Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass.,all promised a thorough review of the nomination.
Confirmation hearingsare expected to begin after Congress' August recess.
Anunabashed conservative, he would succeed the court's leading liberal -- andfirst and only black justice.
"The background of JudgeClarence Thomas is less important than his views and what they mean toprotecting our constitutional rights," said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill. Whenhead of the EEOC during the Reagan administration , Thomas "seemed to go out ofhis way to find ways to weaken some of the basic civil rights protections,"said Simon, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
.
.
After the committeemakes a recommendation, the nomination will be voted on by the full Senate.
fromHoly Cross College, 1971; J.D.
Circuit Court of Appeals forDistrict of Columbia; Source: Who's Who Among Black Americans  
