Introduction:SUMMARY A lengthy statement attributed to the imprisoned Shining Path leadership, published recently in a leading opposition newspaper, provides what appears to be a strategic rationale for the peace proposal made by the insurgents last fall.
While the newspaper has accepted the document as an authentic call for peace by the Shining Path, the paper has also stressed that the peace called for in the statement is nothing more than a temporary tactical retreat by the Shining Path leaders and is not, as President Alberto Fujimori has contended, an implicit admission of defeat.
Although La Republica, a prominent anti-Fujimori daily, provided little information on the origins of the "important and unusual" document that it published in a special 25 January supplement, it assured its readers that the lengthy ideological tract explaining the Shining Path's "struggle for a peace agreement" was a genuine Shining Path statement.
(See Note 1) (Note 1) La Republica did not assert that the document was actually signed by Guzman.
While the anti-Fujimori daily may have, at least in part, published the document to discredit President Fujimori, it contended that it was motivated by a desire to provide Peruvians with information on the peace proposal that had not been made available by the government.
The paper declared that it was "clearly" its "duty" to publish the document "given the mantle of silence that the government has cast" over the peace negotiations (26 January).
The Shining Path leadership's sudden willingness to pursue peace talks with the government, just as the 31 October national referendum vote was approaching, raised questions in the media about whether the letters really represented authoritative Shining Path policy [see box].
(See Note 2) (Note 2) Among other objectives, the narrowly successful referendum was designed to allow the president to serve a second successive term.
La Republica offered a possible explanation for the insurgents' tactical retreat in a 3O January interview with a "military and subversion analyst," who suggested-that a temporary withdrawal may offer Guzman an opportunity to preserve his authority as political leader despite the obvious limitations of beings imprisoned.
Thee analyst concluded, therefore, that the insurgents' peace strategy represents "an ideological reaffirmation of Guzman's leadership" and "recognition that circumstances have changed."
At the same time, however, by concluding that the published strategy statement is merely the Shining Path's declaration of temporary retreat, the daily has raised new questions about the credibility of Fujimori's claim that the call for peace represents a victory for the government.
While such doubts are unlikely to seriously affect Fujimori's prospects for reelection next year, they may have further tarnished the image of the Peruvian president, already damaged by his narrow victory in the constitutional referendum last October.
-- Following the second Guzman letter, which supplemented the call for peace talks with what seemed to be praise for Fujimori's economic and political program (Lima Global de Television, 1O October 1993), a commentator for the anti-Fujimori weekly Caretas wrote that the government was using a "broken" Guzman "in the campaign for the 'yes' vote" for the upcoming referendum, adding that "it is no coincidence that the letters .
.
.
have come out during the 3O days prior" to the 31 October vote (14 October 1993).
GILISON  cka 17/0107z mar 
