The Civil Aviation Authority, meanwhile, ordered increasedinspections on 37 airplanes with CFM56 engines, the type on theMidland Airways jet that crashed Sunday.
``Error on the Flight Deck,'' the Today newspaper said.
``FatalError'' said the Daily Star.
``Pilot Shut Off the Wrong Engine''said the Sun.
The statement from the department's Air Accidents InvestigationBranch also confirmed that the airplane's left engine caught fireand the right engine was shut down, and that pilot Kevin Hunt hadtold ground control the fire was in the right engine.
In the United States, NBC News quoted unidentified U.S.government sources as saying ``the plane's flight recorders, whichmonitor engine performance and the pilots' conversations, indicatethe crew shut down the wrong engine.
The trouble was in one _ theyshut down the other.''
The airplane's two ``black boxes,'' the cockpit voice recorderand digital flight data recorder, are being examined at thegovernment's laboratory in Farnborough, outside London.
According to court documents and federal officials in America,the FBI is investigating a General Electric Co. admission that testrecords may have been falsified at a factory which made parts forthe CFM56 engine that failed here.
The Seattle factory also made a check and flow valve for the F404engine aboard the Navy's FA-18 fighter, GE spokesman Richard Kennedysaid Wednesday.
A letter from a GE attorney last year said testrecords may have been falsified for the fighter plane valves.
The timer valve made by GE for the CFM56 engine could not havecaused the turbine to fail even if the valve malfunctioned, Kennedysaid.
The plane took off at 7:52 p.m. Sunday.
Then, at 8:14 p.m., the sourcessaid he told traffic control: ``I am shutting down the starboard(right) engine.''
The plane crashed 12 minutes later at 8:26 p.m.
The engines are made jointly by U.S.-based GE and a Frenchcompany, SNECMA.
But certainly this precautionary measure doesnot imply there has been any cause identified (for the crash.
)''
