Introduction: Tuberculosis is alarming health officials againbecause it's posing new health threats with its connection to theAIDS virus.
A 35 percent increase in tuberculosis in 1989 in Newark, N.J.,has caught the attention of health officials, who had beenpreviously recording with satisfaction a slow, steady decrease inTB cases over the last few decades.
They attribute the 5 percent national increase in TB cases in1989 to the ravages of the AIDS virus, which destroys the body'simmune system and leaves victims open to TB infection, Dr. PhilipC.
Hopewell of San Francisco General Hospital said Sunday.
Dixie E. Snider Jr., director of the division of tuberculosiscontrol at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
``The combination of the two is really catastrophic,'' she said.
``It's important we get control of the situation,'' he said.
``I have never heard of a rise of the magnitude seen in NewJersey or, on the other hand, the hope generated by no cases in onestate,'' Reichman said.
Untreated, tuberculosiskills about 50 percent of its victims within two years, accordingto the Centers for Disease Control.
Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium that commonly affects thelungs but can attack almost any organ.
For the last three decades,it has been preventable and curable through multiple drug therapy,Snider said.
Snider said 10 million to 15 million Americans have beeninfected with the tuberculosis germ, but only a small percentage ofthem develop the disease because their immune system was strongenough to prevent the disease from developing.
If, however, a person's immune system is impaired by poornutrition or weakened by the HIV virus, people can develop activeTB.
Tuberculosis can be effectively treated, even in AIDS patients,underscoring efforts to screen persons for the disease, the doctorsaid.
While associated with poverty and crowded living conditions, TBthrough history has ravaged both the poor and the famous.
TBvictims include Henry David Thoreau, Washington Irving, FranzKafka, Ring Lardner, Somerset Maugham and Vivien Leigh.
