"They cite the Constitution's Second Amendment and argue itprohibits effective national regulation of the privateownership of guns.
In myopinion, it even provides a solid constitutional basis foreffective national legislation to regulate guns and gunowners.
The best clues to the meaning of the key words and phrasesare in debates in the First Congress of the United States.
The Members of that Congress were the authors of the SecondAmendment.
.
The Constitution wasratified without adopting any of the scores of proposedamendments.
These eventually became the Billof Rights.
In the version of the arms amendment he presented,Madison dropped mention of a standing army and added aconscientious objector clause.
The right of the people to serve in the militia.
"The House then debated this new version in committee ofthe whole and, surprisingly, considering the subsequenthistory of the provision, never once did any member mentionthe private uses of arms, for self-protection, or hunting, orany other personal purpose.
The debate focused exclusively onthe conscientious objector provision.
But what about the private right "to keep and bear arms,"to own a gun for self-defense and hunting?
Didn't just about everyone own agun in 1791?
Wouldn't that right go without saying?
Almost everyone also owned a dog for the samepurposes.
The Constitution nevertheless says nothing aboutthe undeniable right to own a dog.
All of them areconstitutionally subject to regulation.
The right to bear arms protected in the Second Amendmenthas to do directly with "a well-regulated militia."
Here we see the link of the private and public aspects ofbearing arms.
What does this mean for the question of gun control today?Well, for example, it means that Congress has theconstitutional power to enact a Militia Act of 1992, torequire every person who owns a gun or aspires to own one to"enroll" in the militia.
In plain 1990s English, if you wantto own a gun, sign up with the National Guard.
Call in the militia, which is, afterall, "composed of the body of the people.
"
