Introduction:   America's 1988 drought captured attentioneverywhere, but especially in Washington where politicians pushedthrough the largest disaster relief measure in U.S. history.
The record $3.9 billion drought relief program of 1988, hailedas salvation for small farmers devastated by a brutal dry spell,became much more _ an unexpected, election-year windfall forthousands of farmers who collected millions of dollars for nature'snormal quirks.
At each step, the program was broadened.
Then floods.
Next came ``heat,'' an addition from the Agriculture Department.
None of those conditions should have been ruled eligible,administrators in Washington say.
``We lucked out last year on account of the boys up north,''said Travis Turnipseed, a Levelland, Texas, cotton farmer who's hadhail damage 23 out of the last 28 years, but collected cash for thefirst time in 1988.
Loose regulations and lax enforcement of them were the majorreasons for the government generosity, the AP found by examiningfederal records in 14 states through the Freedom of Information Act.
The politics of 1988 and the media attention the droughtreceived _ a steady bombardment of print and electronic images ofshriveled cornstalks and cracked, dusty fields _ played key rolesin rushing through the nation's largest ever disaster reliefmeasure.
In the end, drought relief became a one-time bonus for thousandsof farmers in parts of the country that in 1988 generally enjoyedgood crops at higher prices and wouldn't have qualified as disasterareas, including parts of California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas,Oklahoma, Maryland and New Jersey.
Most farmers simply took advantage of a generousprogram.
Government officials say they did the best they could with arushed program.
Loopholes were tightened in 1989's smaller $1billion drought relief program.
``Some farmers just got grandfathered in, that's true,'' saidDan Shaw, deputy administrator of the Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service, which administers payment programs forthe Agriculture Department.
``What percentage, we don't know.
Butthat is part of the beast I guess that was created.
Whenever you dothis for the whole nation, there are some people that luck out.''
The AP found some farmers who did better than just luck out.
Those growers profited by ``triple-dipping'': reaping cropinsurance as well as drought aid on damaged crops, then replantingthe same ground for a successful harvest _ all perfectly legalunder the 1988 program.
In several cases, corporations ineligible for drought reliefbecause of the bill's $2 million cutoff on gross annual incomecollected anyway because they owned a stake in a farm.
Santa Fe Pacific Co., the railroad giant with annual revenue of$3 billion, received a check through its energy division.
TheAmerican Cancer Society got a check, as did a unit of Texas A&amp;MUniversity and the mid-Atlantic headquarters in Baltimore of theJesuit order.
Fromthose results, the AP selected 120 counties for further study.
Farm Entitlement reports, the ASCS summaries of individualfarms' participation in the program, were requested for about12,000 farms in those counties under the Freedom of Information Act.
One such farmer was Don Gresham, who raises cotton on 4,000acres near Levelland.
Gresham readily offers that he and his sonoperate their farms under five different names precisely because offederal payment limitations _ in the case of drought aid, $100,000per farmer.
Because of hail damage, Gresham and his companies collected$248,662 from the drought program, plus $159,478 from federal cropinsurance.
And he gambled and replanted the lost cotton acres withmilo _ and made a good crop.
``You can't farm without the government.
Youplay their game.
''
