Introduction:The Northwest Airlines jet that crashed Sunday in Detroit, killing at least 154 people, was involved in two incidents of engine failure in the past two years.
The accident, the second-deadliest ever in the U.S., could have a broad range of effects on the airline industry regardless of the specific causes, aviation specialists said.
Following a summer of near-misses, delays and other snafus, some airline specialists said the accident could serve as a catalyst for a reassessment of the nation's air-travel system.
Even so, some congressional aides believe there will be a "spillover" effect, and that all aviation safety issues will now get closer scrutiny.
Moreover, although service problems have been the focus of much of the attention in recent months, the debate may now center more strongly on safety issues.
"This one is going under the microscope."
Added a Senate Commerce Committee staff member: "Delays and other consumer concerns will end up in the back seat."
In Detroit, federal crash inspectors and representatives of United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit, the engine maker, arrived at the accident scene.
Officials said that the aircraft's flight recorders, which record cockpit conversations, had been found in wreckage that extended over half a mile.
There were 153 people on a plane with 143 passenger seats.
The extras included six crew members, two babies who were being held by passengers and two Northwest employees riding on two of the plane's jump seats.
Wire-service reports said two persons on the ground also were killed, and that a 4-year-old girl was hospitalized in critical condition.
Late last night, the Associated Press reported that the girl was identified by her grandfather.
Her father, mother and brother were passengers on the Northwest airliner and died in the crash.
The JT8D-219 engines used on the jet have been the subject of some concern among federal safety officals.
The board made the recommendation after a March 23 incident in which an American Airlines MD-82 plane approaching the Minneapolis airport experienced an engine surge and loss of power.
The engine, a JT8D-217A, was shut down, and the plane landed without further trouble.
The board said similar incidents involved Pacific Southwest Airlines and Muse Airlines.
The new rules, proposed last month, will go into effect this fall, FAA officials said.
In its April report, the National Transportation Safety Board warned that "many" of the 330 MD-80 series airplanes operated by 12 U.S. and 14 foreign airlines world-wide "are potential candidates" for engine failure.
However, engineering changes have been made in some engines.
Thomas Haueter, of the safety recommendations staff of the safety agency, said that the board hadn't put out an emergency recommendation for immediate replacement of the pins because it was unclear if the problems that had occurred were merely isolated incidents or reflected system problems.
FAA officials at the crash scene wouldn't speculate on the reasons for the crash or comment on the plane's engines.
John Lauber, one of five members of the National Transportation Safety Board, said at a news conference at a hotel near the airport last night that there was no evidence at this point that either engine exploded or caught fire during flight.
Despite an excellent safety record, Northwest could be hurt in a number of ways by the crash.
Among other things, the accident has focused attention on its recent service problems as well as discord among its workers.
The airline early yesterday denied that its labor troubles may have played a role in the crash.
In January, the Federal Bureau of Investigation began investigating incidents of alleged tampering with Northwest planes in Minneapolis.
The two emergency landings that involved the jetliner, number N312RC, took place in Minneapolis and San Francisco.
In the Minneapolis incident, the plane landed missing part of its tail cone.
The FAA said in Washington that air-traffic controllers in Detroit gave the Northwest flight takeoff clearance for Runway 3C, the center of the airport's three runways.
Then they "saw a blue flash from the left engine," Mr. Leyden said.
FAA records show that besides those incidents that involved the plane that crashed, problems with the turbine sections of JT8D-200 series engines occurred on three Republic flights in the past four years.
None of those problems resulted in a serious accident.
In June 1963, a DC-7 operating as a military charter crashed into the Pacific Ocean, killing all 101 people onboard.
The worst airline accident ever in the U.S. was the 1979 crash of an American Airlines jet in Chicago.

