Four officers took turns kicking and beatingan unresisting victim for more than two minutes.
Blatant racist jokes and comments about the beating on thepolice communications system make it hard to believe thatthis was an "aberration" as Chief Daryl Gates claims.
Yet we, his fellow police chiefs, have for years remainedsilent about Mr. Gates, who yesterday was put on a 60-dayleave by the Los Angeles Police Commission.
A police chief plays an essential role in setting theclimate in which his department operates.
Through the yearsMr.
The exchange soundedmore like one gang challenging another than a police chiefseeking to reduce conflict in the community.
Indeed theRambo-like challenge did not lower violence, and may haveincreased it.
Similarly, Mr. Gates vehemently opposed the Police CorpsProgram backed by other police chiefs.
Mr. Gates opposed the Police Corps because its members wouldnot be professionals.
Such attitudes surviveonly in a closed police culture.
Many chiefs openly disagreed with Mr. Gates when heopposed the Police Corps Bill in Congress.
For example, Mr. Gates once said that blacks were more susceptible than"normal people" to chokeholds.
Two years ago, on a national television documentary, Mr. Gates defended a special unit that had shot many criminalsduring stakeouts.
The unit had advance knowledge that crimeswere about to occur, but often stayed outside and letrobberies occur, even though innocent retailers and customerswere put at risk.
The chief said that arresting the criminalsbefore the robberies wasn't a good idea because the courtswere so lenient.
Last year Los Angeles paid $3 million to 52 residents ofan apartment complex ransacked by police.
Mr. Gatesreluctantly admitted that the officers who did the ransackingwere wrong, but said he could understand their frustration intrying to fight drugs.
Even more recently, Mr. Gates told theSenate that "casual drug users should be taken out and shot.
"He assured the senators that he was not being facetious.
And his initial reaction on television to the Rodney Kingbrutality tapes was defensive.
Mayor Tom Bradley told themedia that such conduct wouldn't be tolerated, and that thewrongdoers would be sought out for punishment.
Presumably, the chief has now received wiser council.
He hascalled for prosecution of three of the officers, and hasproduced a videotape for his troops condemning the beating.
Even Mr. Gates's apology to Mr. King sent the wrongmessage.
He said that he hoped the incident might help Mr. King to straighten out his life.
It is hard to imaginesomeone unlawfully beaten by uniformed officers as otherslooked on being inspired to respect law and order.
Or was thechief suggesting that the beating was a warning againstfurther run-ins with the police?Clearly, Daryl Gates's words and actions create doubtabout his claim that the Rodney King incident was anaberration.
Whenhe characterizes such opposition as cop-haters, he embittershis department and to some extent all police.
It is hard to see how the LosAngeles Police Department can regain credibility unless DarylGates's leave becomes permanent.
But the videotape of theLAPD brutality affects the credibility of all policeofficers.
