It is bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) -- "mad cow" disease -- and few would be prepared to say exactly when and where it will end.
Some German politicians say their country should risk breaking Single Market free trade rules because the potential health risks are so grave.
Nonsense, say British government scientists.
Meanwhile, the controversy in Britain is reaching new heights.
Calling on the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) to do more to explain the disease, the magazine concluded: "The alternative is to exacerbate the current climate of fear and uncertainty..."   The fear is not just that shared by farmers worried about their livelihood.
Could it transfer itself from cows to humans?
Scientists at the Central Veterinary Laboratory in Surrey found that the animals' brains had become holed and spongelike -- similar symptoms to the disease scrapie in sheep and the rare Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), in humans.
New rendering methods, reducing the temperature at which the feed was prepared, were enabling the infective agent to survive, they concluded.
That year it was officially predicted that 20,000 animals would be affected before the feed ban, together with the drying up of any supplies already on farms, had its effect.
But the spread of BSE has confounded original expectations.
The ministry believes that the reason more cattle have died is that farmers or food renderers kept using infected feed after the ban.
Yet there is still controversy.
MAFF says 5,767 of these were born before the end of 1988, and were probably fed from remaining infected supplies.
That theory has been assailed by critics of the ministry.
Ministry scientists, originally dismissive, are now reassessing his theories.
"There is no evidence that this disturbing disease can be transferred from cow to calf," Farmers Weekly insisted last week.
So how long will it be before the epidemic is ended?
The claim that all of these are affected by illegally retained infected feed gets less credible by the hour."
One question -- perhaps the most important -- remains.
If the disease has jumped from sheep to cattle -- and cases have also been reported in kudu antelope at London Zoo -- could it affect humans?
"I'd expect an increase in cases of CJD by the early years of the next century," he says.
"The bottom line is we just don't know what risks we may be running."

