TransManche Link, the construction consortium building the``Chunnel'' said the historic linkup occurred at 8:25 p.m. Tuesdaywhen British workers sent a probe 2 inches in diameter through totheir French colleagues.
Eurotunnel PLC, the Anglo-French consortium overseeing theworld's largest engineering project, plans for high-speed trains topass through the Channel Tunnel in June 1993.
``This is Europe in practice.''
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' a construction unionofficial in Calais said.
Initial tests indicated the two halves were 20 inches out ofalignment.
Technicians will be more certain Wednesday, but theycalled the rough line-up ``exceptional.''
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole.
Tunnelers areexpected to walk through and greet each other with handshakes in afew weeks.
The tunneling machine on the French side will then guide itselfby laser toward the British machine, ensuring perfect alignment.
Thatcher and French President Francois Mitterrand will meetmid-tunnel on Jan. 26.
The other two will handle rail traffic - freightand special piggy-back trains that will carry passengers and cars.
Eight workers suffered injures, two seriously, about 90 minutesafter Tuesday's linkup when a tractor rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
Since the tunnel construction began in 1987 there have beenseven accidental deaths on the British side and two on the Frenchside.
Whhen its work is done, the drilling machine on the French sidewill be hauled out in pieces.
The one on the British side will diga side passage, and be buried in cement.
Officials say it is toocostly to extricate the machine.
Militant workers on the French side are striking for more payand began a work slowdown Thursday, threatening to stall thelink-up.
But it came off on schedule.
Eurotunnel PLC announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreementwith its banks on $3.5 billion in new credit.
More than 200 banksare involved in financing the world's costliest tunnel.
France hopes the project will revitalize depressed northernregions.
Britain warned Napoleon not to try to build the tunnel; diggingwas started subsequently in 1882 and 1974, but both efforts failed.
