``We're certainly not happy to have an incident like thisoccurring, but we need all the information,'' said Councilman ThomasJ.
Clark of the council's request for an investigation.
Curt Livesay, an assisant Los Angeles County district attorneyand head of the office's Special Investigations Division, will leadthe probe, said district attorney spokesman Andy Reynolds.
The black Hawthorne policeman, Sgt.
The incident was broadcast on NBC's nationalnews Monday night.
``We've never been able to come forth before with enough evidence(of alleged police racism).
Now, it is brought to your living roomin living color,'' said Frank Berry, president of the Long Beachchapter of the National Association for the Advancement of ColoredPeople.
The police chief in Long Beach declined to comment pending aninvestigation.
``We will pursue it aggressively,'' said Long Beach City ManagerJames Hanklad.
``If there is evidence of brutality, we will actaccordingly.''
Long Beach Mayor Ernie Kell said on NBC's ``Today'' show thismorning that he was disturbed by the videotape.
The idea first was debated last year amidallegations of police brutality.
Since the incident apparently was timed by Jackson to coincidewith the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. the confrontationshould be considered ``nothing short of timed sensationalism at therisk of serious injury to all of the parties involved,'' Stonebrakersaid.
Jackson got out after the car stopped and police approached.
Jackson complied, and moments later was pushed through aplate-glass store window.
``I'm all right.
OK, no problem,'' saidJackson on the videotape.
``I already cooperated and told him he could search me,'' Jacksonsaid.
``I had already had my hands up and was turned to the windowand he slammed my face in it.''
``I'm more so offended since the Hawthorne Police Department,which has no jurisdiction, is making judgment.''
Jackson said he chose Long Beach police because of complaints tothe Police Misconduct Lawyer's Referral Service of Los Angeles.
David Lynn of the referral service said 50 misconduct complaintswere filed with his group against the Long Beach police.
Of those,27 were filed by minorities, and 24 of those involved confrontationswith white officers.
