Sharp reductions also were reported for soybeans, wheat and anumber of other crops.
Overall, the department's Agricultural Statistics Board puttotal U.S. crop production at 88 percent of the 1977 average, ascale used to compare output from year to year.
That matched thelow 1983 reading, when sharp cutbacks in government acreageprograms, along with drought, reduced crop production sharply.
``But becauseof large pre-season stocks, total supplies are enough in most casesto assure and adequate food supply at home, satisfy foreigncustomers and meet our food-aid commitments.''
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate AgricultureCommittee, said in a statement, ``Today's crop report confirms ourfears about the impacts of this summer's tragic drought.
Fortunately, it appears we will have enough stocks to make itthrough this marketing year.''
``But it will tide you over until normal weather and yourown skills permit you to return to your accustomed role.''
1.
The soybean harvest was estimated at 1.47 billion bushels, down23 percent from 1.9 billion bushels produced last year.
Prospectslast spring called for about 1.88 billion bushels, and the Julyprojection was 1.65 billion bushels.
Production of all wheat was indicated at 1.82 billion bushels,down 13 percent from 2.1 billion produced in 1987.
The Julyprojection was 1.84 billion bushels The wheat total included winter wheat planted last fall, whichbarely stayed ahead of the drought.
Later plantings of durum andother spring wheat varieties were brutalized by heat and dryness.
Winter wheat production was estimated at 1.55 billion bushels,down 1 percent from last year.
But durum and the other springvarieties, which are produced in the hard-hit northern plains,showed sharp declines.
Durum was estimated at 54.6 million bushels, down 41 percentfrom last year's harvest, and other spring wheat was shown at 212million bushels, down 53 percent from 1987.
Cotton production was estimated at 14.9 million bales, up 1percent from last year.
The crop was projected at 13.7 billionbales in July.
Department officials said U.S. grain production this year isexpected to total 192 million metric tons, 31 percent smaller thanthe 1987 output.
In addition to the reductions in corn and soybean yields, Wilsonsaid production of some other spring-planted crops has suffered,including: oats, 206 million bushels, down 45 percent; barley, 288million bushels, also down 45 percent; and sorghum, 561 millionbushels, down 24 percent.
The department has forecast a food price increase this year of 3percent to 5 percent.
``Sothis would bring it up to a total of 6 percent.''
He saidproduction abroad would have to take up the slack in world foodsupply caused by the drought.
``Our figures here today would indicate that food production inother countries has not been cut that much,'' he said.
Henoted that 50 million farm acres are being kept out of productionthis year in addition to millions of additional acres in thelong-term Conservation Reserve Program.
