Introduction: A B-52 bomber crashed and burst intoflames early today on a runway while practicing ``touch-and-go''landings at K.I.
Sawyer Air Force Base, officials said.
All eightcrew members survived.
No weapons were aboard, said Lt. Col. George Peck, a spokesmanfor SAC headquarters in Omaha, Neb.
The crew members crawled orwere helped out of the front section of the aircraft, he said.
Theywere taken to Marquette General and base hospitals.
Paul Bicking, another Sawyer spokesman.
Senior Airman Tim Sanders, another base spokesman, said thoseaboard were Capt.
Mark Hartney, 29, an aircraft commander fromMulberry, Fla.; 1st Lt. Michael S. Debruzzi, 26, a pilot from NewBrighton, Minn.; Capt.
Anthony D. Phillips, 28, a radar navigatorfrom Folkston, Ga.; 1st Lt. James W. Herrmann, 30, a navigator fromSharpsville, Pa.; 1st Lt. Daniel McCarrick, 25, an electronicwarfare officer from Succasunna, N.J.; Airman 1st Class, Joseph A.Vallie, 20, a gunner from Stephenson, Mich.; Maj. William R.Kroeger, 52, an instructor pilot from Fountain Hills, Ariz.; and 1stLt.
Gregory C. Smith, 26, an upgrade pilot from Henning, Minn. Allwere based at Sawyer.
Ann Parent, a spokeswoman for Marquette General Hospital, saidHartney and Debruzzi were in fair condition, Phillips and Valliewere in stable condition, McCarrick was in satisfactory conditionand Kroeger was in serious condition.
Anita Bailey.
Hartney was the aircraft commander, but Debruzzi also wasqualified to fly the plane, Bailey said.
``We are counting our blessings,'' Bailey said.
``You can putparts of a plane back together, but you cannot put people backtogether.''
Peck said it was not unusual for B-52 training missions to be outat that hour.
The eight-engine B-52, which was deployed in the early 1950s, isthe military's biggest bomber, with a wingspan of 185 feet and amaximum takeoff weight of 488,000 pounds.
In other accidents involving B-52s, a bomber was damaged when apilot aborted a takeoff and overshot a runway at Castle Air ForceBase in central California on Feb. 11.
No one was injured.
A B-52 bomber with radar problems crashed in Arizona'a MonumentValley in October 1984, killing two crew members, after its wingsclipped a mesa.
Six crewmen died and 10 were injured Oct. 11 when an Air Forcetanker en route from K.I.
Sawyer crashed at Wurtsmith Air Force Basenear Oscoda.
Wurtsmith and Sawyer are Michigan's two SAC bases.
