Introduction:MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Friday nights used to be slow at TheFault Line, a nightclub here on busy Poplar Avenue.
Shaken, thousands of people arecrowding into earthquake survival classes.
In Arnold, Mo.,3,000 people showed up for one course.
In Missouri and Arkansas, some schools and businesses haveannounced plans to close in early December.
Some people are planning to flee.
"You can't run fromeverything," says Tammy McCormick, a nurse in Blytheville,Ark.
, who will take her two youngsters and spend several dayswith relatives in North Carolina. "
But it seems stupid tostay on a fault line with a prediction like this.
Church bells rang as far away as Boston.
Chimneys crumbledin Cincinnati.
That could produce billions of dollars indamage and thousands of casualties.
New Madrid, Mo., thefault's namesake, draws tourists to a museum with exhibits onthe 19th century devastation.
Mr. Browning, who has a Ph.D. in physiology, genetics andbacteriology, writes a climate newsletter out of New Mexico.
Mr. Browning says that will exertpressure that could trigger faults already ripe to fail.
Skepticism abounds.
But Mr. Browning shouldn't be written off so quickly, saysSoutheast Missouri State's Mr. Stewart, who recently spentfour days with Mr. Browning. "
He has a methodology that candetermine, plus or minus a window of a day or two, anenhanced probability of a volcano or an earthquake in certainlatitudes," says Mr. Stewart.
"No one else has been able toreplicate it, but that doesn't mean it's wrong."Mr.
Browning says it's not easy being on record withpredictions that few other scientists will support.
"I feellike a lonely little petunia in a cabbage patch," he says.
If one is a business consultant,they don't pay you for being wrong.
"Plenty of other business people are cashing in on hisprediction.
"All of this has changed life in places like Blytheville,Ark.
So many people plan to skip town on Dec. 3 that theFlexible Technologies tubing plant already plans to shut downfor two days, at a cost of thousands of dollars.
Says JimmyConnell, plant superintendent, "It's going to be a ghost townaround here.
"Robert Edwards, a Blytheville fireman who teaches seminarsin earthquake survival, has become a hot property.
For fiveyears, most of his classes were lightly attended.
Now hisphone-answering machine says he is almost completely bookedthrough October.
For one recent class, he was in Osceola, Ark.
With his boomingvoice, Mr. Edwards lays out a grim scenario: "One hundred andfifty thousand dead in Memphis instantly -- instantly.
You have to be prepared to take complete care ofyourself for 24 hours to two weeks.
You may be five to sixmonths without power.
Fearing their home will be looted, Bess Mann,86 years old, wants to ride it out.
But her sister, HalliePeterson, 83, wants to stay with their nephew in Mississippi.
Some schools practice earthquakedrills, while others sponsor cake sales to buy survival kitsfor classrooms, with items like blankets, flashlights andradios.
Michael Prince, a child psychologist in Jonesboro, says heknows of 10 to 15 children, age four to nine, so unnervedthat they've reverted to bed-wetting or extreme anxiety aboutbeing separated from their parents.
Louis.
But he adds: "I highly recommend against panic.
That will kill more people than earthquakes.
"
