Introduction: Exxon salvage crews successfully refloated the stricken tanker Exxon Valdez on Wednesday as the former captain of the vessel surrendered to authorities in New York to face criminal charges in the massive oil spill.
Together, those three charges have a maximum penalty of 27 months in prison and a $10,000 fine. "
"We have a man-made destruction that has not been equaled, probably, since Hiroshima."
No people have been killed or even seriously injured by the spill, but oil has seriously disrupted the rich Prince William Sound fishing industry.
Also, animal-rescue teams estimate the spill has killed several thousand birds and hundreds of sea otters.
Estimates of wildlife deaths are not easy to make because oiled birds are hard to spot from the air, and many beaches are difficult to reach for in person inspections.
In the wildlife-rich sound, cleanup crews continued to skim emulsified oil as thick as pudding.
Alaska Gov.
Maybe that's been the problem all along.
.
.
the information necessary to make sound planning recommendations regarding the cleanup of oil and the protection of resources," wrote Lynn Kent, chief of the state Oil and Hazardous Substance Spill Response Section.
President Bush earlier had sent a team of high-level officials to Valdez and determined that federal management of the cleanup was not necessary.
Rear Adm. Edward Nelson Jr., commander of the Coast Guard's 17th District in Juneau had no immediate reply to Cowper's request.
"We gathered all the resources and organized the cleanup.
The tanker refloat went unexpectedly well.
The ship was made airtight above the water line, and then, on Wednesday, compressed air was forced inside.
The air forced out some of the 998,000 barrels of sea water that had been pumped into the stricken tanker as oil was removed.
He added that this technique also would produce a pressurized buffer of clean sea water between the oil left in the tanker -- about 15,000 to 20,000 barrels -- and the once-pristine waters off Valdez.
Oil flow from the North Slope had been cut by 60% because the spill restricted tanker traffic in Valdez harbor, but traffic has increased.
Portland, Ore., was the company's first choice, but it backed away from that option after Oregon Gov.
Already under attack by Gov.
Even as it made that concession, the company denied its ship would endanger any port it visited for repair.
Staff writer Larry B. Stammer in Valdez contributed to this report.

