Introduction:   Millions of gallons of crude oil thatspilled when a tanker ran aground spread across a wildlife-richstretch of ocean Saturday, and Alaska's chief environmental officercriticized cleanup efforts as too slow.
The biggest oil spill in U.S. history created a slick aboutseven miles long and seven miles wide in Prince William Sound.
Some 240,000 barrels _ about 10,080,000 gallons _ of crude oilfrom Alaska's North Slope spilled early Friday when the 987-foottanker Exxon Valdez ran hard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 milesoutside Valdez, where it had taken on a total cargo of 1.2 millionbarrels.
Initial reports indicated 270,000 barrels had spilled.
``What we have here is a major environmental catastrophe,'' saidone oil spill expert, Richard Golob of Boston, publisher of GolobOil Pollution Bulletin.
``The only way forthis oil to ecape out to the sea is by traversing the entire lengthof Prince William Sound with all its islands, fjords and bays andchannels.
Efforts to begin pumping 200,000 gallons of oil off the ExxonValdez onto another tanker, the Exxon Baton Rouge, were haltedearly Saturday when authorities noticed that oil appeared toleaking as the pumping operation proceeded.
``If it'snot ... you endanger the stability of the vessel.''
``The initial reponse was inadequate and unacceptable,'' he saidbefore a news conference Saturday.
``You missthe opportunity right at the beginning and you've missed our bestopportunity to do something.''
``I think our people did an excellent job,'' hesaid.
``The whole food chain could be affected by the spill,'' saidAlan Reichman, ocean ecology coordinator for the environmentalgroup Greenpeace, in Seattle.
``Some birdshave already died, and we are doing our best to try to save thefish by containing the oil to the area where it presently is and bytrying to skim it.''
Whales, porpoises and seals are also common in Prince WilliamSound.
The response to the spill also drew fire from the 12,000-memberUnited Fishermen of Alaska.
She noted that the spill hadoccurred in a protected area close to the Valdez marine terminaland the water was calm.
Fishermen also take salmon and shellfishfrom the sound.
The Port of Valdez remained closed to tanker traffic.
NorthSlope crude oil is shipped 800 miles through the trans-Alaska oilpipeline from Prudhoe Bay south to Valdez for shipment aboardtankers to refineries outside Alaska.
The vessel's captain, Joseph Hazelwood, has worked for Exxon for20 years, at least 10 as a ship's master.
It was unclear if a pilotwas aboard the Exxon Valdez when it grounded.
There was no decision Saturday on whether to use chemicals todisperse the oil, but a test of the dispersal method was beingconducted Saturday afternoon, as was a test to determine whether atleast some of the crude oil could be burned.
Coast Guard Cmdr.
The Coast Guard issued a statement late Saturday that McCall hassubpoenaed the ship's master and two crew members.
The subpoenas require them to make themselves available to NTSBinvestigators arriving Sunday.
Previously, the largest U.S. tanker spill was the Dec. 15, 1976,grounding of the Argo Merchant tanker off the Nantucket shoals offMassachusetts, in which 7.6 million gallons of oil spilled, Golobsaid.
Up to 10.7 million gallons of oil was lost on Nov. 1, 1979, whenthe tanker Burmah Agate collided with another ship in GalvestonBay, Texas.
However, that oil burned as well as spilled.
The largest tanker spill in history resulted from the July 19,1979, collision off Tobago of the supertankers Atlantic Empress andAegean Captain, in which 300,000 tons _ more than 80 milliongallons _ of oil was lost.
