Introduction:EAST DENNIS, Mass.
I'm struggling at the age of 43. .
.
.
This isn't golf.
"My doctor says: `No running, whatsoever.'
Last year, fiveJapanese runners were waved away by the bodyguards, as theysidled up to the old celebrity during the race.
Recalls SuniTomomitsu, one of the runners: "At first we thought, `Oh,wow, he's like Mafia man.'
In Japan, he is awesome.
"Though he isn't the oldest person ever to enter the BostonMarathon, Mr. Kelley is the oldest to run it.
But he walked the course.
Starting at dawn (sixhours before the official noon start), Mr. Foley wouldeventually saunter across the finish line in the moonlight.
Of course, Mr. Kelley -- not to be confused with the otherJohn Kelley, who won the Boston Marathon in 1957 -- isn't therunner he was in 1935 when he won the race, in 2 hours, 32minutes, 7 seconds.
His best time ever was in 1945: 2 hours,30 minutes, 40 seconds.
Last year he finished in 5 hours, 5minutes.
He hopes to do better in 1991.
God bless them," he adds.
"Theydeserve it.
He's going to be one of the starsof my book."
(That's good.)
His only purpose was to relax andhave some fun. "
All day long, I did what my boss told me todo," he recalls.
"But when I ran at night, I felt free.
I rantill I was exhausted.
"In 1928, when he was 21, he entered his first BostonMarathon but didn't finish.
He dropped out three-quarters ofthe way through the race.
Then, in 1933, he finished 37th ina field of about 200 runners.
In all the years since, he hasmissed the race just once, in 1967.
(He has competed, alltold, in 112 marathons, including the 1936 and 1948 Olympics.
An Exxon station in Wellesley marks the halfway point.
It cost him atleast two victories, he says.
Boston'sskyline, 2 1/2 miles in the distance, can seem so far away.
To compensate, he trainsharder.
He used to start preparing in earnest at the end ofJanuary. "
(He doesn't count the mileshe puts in, as many long-distance runners obsessively do, buthe says he wouldn't object to an estimate of about 50 miles aweek.)Mr.
Hisroutes vary.
In January, he prefers the frozen sands of thebeach.
With the approach of spring, he takes to the alder andscrub-pine hills and bluffs where the sun can be seen risingover Cape Cod Bay.
This ismy warm up: I empty the dishwasher, I set up the coffeepot,but I don't plug it in.
I set up the breakfast table.
Then Icheck the outside temperature to see what clothes to wear.
Heisn't particular about brands of shoes ("I wear them all") orwhat he eats ("I never eat broccoli, but I love steak and icecream.")Mr.
I run because Ilike it.
But I'll tell you, the BostonMarathon -- with all those people waving -- is better than mybirthday.
"
