Remarkably, as many as 166 persons survived the violent crash, according to Richard Vohs, a spokesman for Iowa Gov.
Terry E. Branstad.
The fate of four others was not immediately known.
As rescuers worked underneath floodlights to remove bodies from the crash site, original estimates of the death toll -- one as high as 190, which would have made the crash the second worst in U.S. history -- were reduced.
"We don't have a firm count" of the dead, Vohs acknowledged at a press conference seven hours after the crash.
"But right now, the number (of survivors) confirmed is 166."
"We were all walking around in shock.
I was a little dazed."
The search for bodies was difficult because some of them were scattered in the cornfield.
Many of the survivors were listed in critical condition with burns or broken bones.
Eyewitnesses said pieces of the 15-year-old airplane -- one of the oldest airliners in United's fleet -- were falling off as far as 75 miles from the site of the crash.
The hydraulic system that disintegrated Wednesday works the same way a power steering system operates in a car.
Some aviation experts, speculating on why Flight 232 crashed after completing less than half of its scheduled 930-mile trip to Chicago, suggested that the explosion of the tail engine sent shards of metal through the tail section, somehow destroying common lines that serve the three hydraulic systems.
In what survivors described as a heroic effort that nearly succeeded, the plane's Seattle-based captain, A. C. Haynes -- a 33-year veteran of the airline who along with the other 10 crew members survived the crash -- struggled for a half-hour to maintain control of the wobbling plane.
Radio transmission indicated the plane's maneuverability was limited to right-hand turns.
Preparing for Crash Landing "Then they said we were preparing for a crash landing.
At about 4 p.m. CDT, the plane made its final approach.
Onlookers watched hopefully.
The wing hit the ground a half-mile before the runway.
A large piece of the fuselage barreled onto the runway.
Rescue helicopters hovered overhead.
I grabbed another, kept pulling them out until they didn't come no more."
Dr. Romaine Bendixen, clinic commander of Iowa National Guard's 185th tactical fighter group, said he was the first doctor on the scene, about three minutes after the crash.
He had just landed in another plane.
He said the living were scattered among the dead. "
He said rescuers pulled out three of the flight crew alive.
They were in remarkably good shape.
From looking at one or two of them you wouldn't know they were in the accident," Graham said.
He said a smaller plane, such as a DC-9, would have been far more likely to break up more severely.
A spokesman said they sustained light injuries.
About 50 survivors were housed overnight at Briarcliff College.
She said no one at the farm saw or heard the object fall.
McDonnell Douglas Corp., which builds the DC-10, said the plane was delivered to United in 1974.
United, the nation's second largest airline, has one of the oldest fleets in the industry.
The average age of its aircraft is 13.5 years.
The average for the entire industry is 11.7 years.
No unusual weather was reported.
Wind speeds were clocked up to 30 m.p.h.
A DC-10 was involved in the nation's worst air crash 10 years ago.
The National Transportation Safety Board cited "maintenance-induced damage" -- a 10-inch crack in the engine mount -- that caused the left engine to tear loose.
The NTSB also criticized McDonnell Douglas' design as vulnerable to maintenance damage.
McDonnell Douglas suspended production of the DC-10 airliner in 1983.
In all, 369 DC-10s were produced.
The cause of that accident, which took place over the Pacific near Hawaii, is under investigation.
Turns Up Deficiencies The accident probe has turned up deficiencies in United's procedures regarding the cargo doors.
On July 10, a United Boeing 747 was forced to make an emergency landing at Miami International Airport after the plane was damaged in heavy turbulence over the Florida-Georgia border.
None of the airliner's 108 passengers were injured.
The second-worst crash in U.S. history was an Aug. 16, 1987, crash that killed 156 people when a Northwest Airlines jet crashed on takeoff at Detroit Metropolitan Airport.
One child on the plane survived.
The "complete hydraulic failure" reported by the United pilot is one of the most feared events in flying.
Page 17 RESCUE TEAMS READY -- The Sioux City, Iowa, fire-and-rescue operations had practiced for a major emergency.
Page 18 
