The real surprise isthat some strong supporters of free markets, such as The WallStreet Journal, have been the biggest advocates of termlimits.
What is going on here?One argument is that incumbent politicians have unfairadvantages in elections because of their ready access tocampaign funds, staff, mailing and travel privileges, mediapublicity, and so on.
This argument is similar tothe Galbraith-like view that big corporations with massiveadvertising budgets can consistently dupe their customersinto buying inferior products.
Another argument is that a citizen Congress with itscontinuing flow of fresh faces into Washington would resultin better government than that provided by representativeswith lengthy tenure.
The counter-argument is that experienceis an important characteristic for legislators.
Eachviewpoint has some validity.
Most of us would not want the government todetermine whether a familiar or a new brand of toothpaste ispreferable; why is a political representative different inthis respect?Many commentators bemoan the high tendency for incumbentsto be re-elected.
But if the electoral control process isworking, so that officeholders conform with the interests ofthe majority of their constituents, then the electoraterewards its representatives with re-election.
If the publicvoted against satisfactory performers just to install a newface, then officeholders would have less incentive to behaveand the system would work badly.
(It is interesting tonote, however, that Hamilton was not discussing term limitson the legislature, and was actually arguing against the termlimits on the chief executive that are contained now in the22nd Amendment.
Representativesaccumulate more power as they become more senior, partlybecause of better committee assignments and more staff andpartly because of increased familiarity with governmentofficials and institutions and with outside interest groups.
Thevoters would be better off if they could reach a bindingagreement that precluded the re-election of incumbents, thatis, if term limits were instituted.
Yet thesame voters likely would have approved a proposal thatlimited the terms of all Congressional representatives, notjust those from Washington.
Changes in the seniority system may therefore be asuperior alternative to term limits.
The weakening of the seniority system in Congress would,it must be conceded, sacrifice some genuine benefits.
Greaterexperience may justify positions of more authority, and, therewards from seniority give Congress an efficient method tomotivate good behavior from junior members.
The formal system of seniorityis also only a part of the story; members' increasingfamiliarity with interest groups is a kind of seniority thatwould not be eliminated by changes in the rules for committeeassignments, staffing and so on.
It is unrealistic as well asundesirable to try to remove completely the operation of aseniority system in any legislature.
The various complexities about legislative term limits andtheir interaction with seniority do not arise for executiveterm limits.
Of course, since the passage of the 22nd Amendment in1951, there is a two-term limit on the presidency, and 29 ofthe 50 states have some kind of term limit on the governor.
(Seven of these limits have been introduced since 1960.
Perhaps the best test of executive term limits is to checkwhether the states with term limits on the governor haveperformed better or worse than those without such limits.
Notsurprisingly, the main message is that executive term limitsare not an important determinant of economic growth or statespending.
Executive term limits are therefore a bad idea, but oneshould not expect vastly better performance at the state ornational level from the elimination of these restrictions.
Legislative term limits are less clear-cut and it is possibleto build a respectable case that favors such limits.
But itis unrealistic to think that the enactment of these limitswould lead to great improvements in the functioning ofgovernment and hence, in the performance of the economy.
