Introduction: A Long Beach-bound Exxon oil tanker ran aground on a reef Friday and spilled an estimated 8.4 million gallons of crude oil into Alaska's Prince William Sound, a pristine Pacific waterway heavily used by kayakers, fishermen and tourists.
The Exxon Valdez, a 987-foot tanker owned by Exxon Shipping Co., rammed the reef about 25 miles from the city of Valdez, the northernmost ice-free port in the United States, at 12:30 a.m. Coast Guard officers speculated that the ship's captain may have been trying to avoid icebergs from the nearby Columbia Glacier when the accident occurred.
"We've had no report of any wildlife hurt at this time," he said.
Environmentalists also expressed concern about whales, sea lions and other wildlife.
"There (was) no oil (cleanup equipment) out there and it's been 14 hours since it happened.
"It is huge, literally huge," he said in a telephone interview from Cordova.
"It looks devastating.
Fortunately, there is no wind.
.
.
.
"It is more than 12 hours later and there is no (cleanup) boom, no sweepers.
They are bringing equipment from as far away as England.
.
.
.
Exxon's Parish said everything possible was being done.
"It takes time to get activated," he said.
"It's also a pretty well-established tourist attraction, with sailing and glacier viewing trips.
Prince William is a gem."
"It's of concern for two reasons: one is the size of the spill and that this is such a sensitive, very productive area," said Lisa Speer, senior staff scientist with the Natural Resources Defense Council in New York.
"This is a consequence of North Slope oil development that is rarely mentioned."
Expected Worst " But this could be a catastrophic occurrence, so we're concerned," he said.
"Living in Valdez, we've always worried that sometime something like this could happen."
Alaska Gov.
"It's going to be a tough judgment call."
This is a major spill by any reckoning.
"We've been able to brag for a long time that there's never been a major oil spill in Valdez Harbor.
Now, we can't do that anymore."

