"How can anybody in the world do that after running all those rounds (preliminary heats)?
"I said, 'Look, I don't know what he is taking or what he is doing, but he is doing something.'
At a Canadian inquiry into drug use in sport Monday at Toronto, Charlie Francis, a Canadian sprint coach, testified that Johnson might have drunk contaminated beer before a urinalysis.
Francis based his theory on the fact that Johnson took the steroid furazabol three weeks before the Games, not the difficult-to-detect stanozolol.
"These sound like the last acts of desperate men who know they've committed wrong and see no other way out other than to continue to lie and to fabricate stories. "
Charlie and Ben should own up to the fact that what they did was wrong, and should promise to never to do it again and move on with their lives.
By continuing their present course of action they are just embarrassing themselves further."
Though Johnson's gold medal and Seoul world-record time were both revoked, his world mark of 9.83 seconds stands.
He set the record at the 1987 World Championships at Rome, where Lewis finished second in 9.93 seconds.
IAAF officials, however, said the record will stand because Johnson passed a drug test after the 1987 race.
"If it has been proven that he took drugs, I would think that (withdrawing the record) is the responsible thing for the sport," Lewis said Sunday.
The drugs induce the growth of muscle tissue, and some athletes claim, help performances. "
"That's not true.
They wanted to beat people.
That's why they got on drugs."
He said about 90% of the athletes are drug-free. "
"There are athletes who do have a problem.
I can tell who's on it.
"She is a victim.
That's going to happen.
People who know her know it."
In finishing second at the Olympics, Lewis set a U.S. record of 9.92 seconds.
It didn't ease the pain of not winning and feeling he (Johnson) was on drugs.
But it made me feel like I'm putting something back into track and field because I'm setting an example."
"He needs to stand up and say, 'Don't do it.
Don't take it unless you know what it is.'
"But he is perpetuating continued drug use.
The biggest thing about drug use is denial.
Somebody takes cocaine because they want to get high.
Some people take steroids because they want to run faster.
It's the same thing.
You're trying to cheat somehow."
"That's what people don't realize," he said.
If anybody gets what they deserve in track and field, it's me.
I make the most money, I get the appearances.
That people cannot sacrifice for something in their life, whether it is a small insignificant thing to others or a big thing to the world, what's the use of living?"
"I feel if I can't sacrifice myself for the betterment of other people in track and field, well, then I cannot leave a legacy that will be remembered."

