It has inspired a raft of rumors and handed up a field day for the giddy tabloids.
And today, yet again, everyone is talking about La Liz.
If she has enjoyed the most brilliant career and the glare of fame, she has also survived seven rocky marriages to six men, the frailest health and the most frightening bouts with addiction to booze, drugs and food.
And through it all, there have been armies of press recording each divorce, each hospital stay.
No AIDS, they said.
No cancer.
Liz is a national treasure and when she entered the hospital, I thought it was as important as the President of the U.S. going in and we treated it as such.
Liz is as close to American royalty as you can have, and our readers .
.
.
in the heartland .
.
.
Levine declined comment on a rumor circulating among reporters that the tabloid had paid $50,000 for the pictures.
Some press coverage has bent over backwards to tug at the bounds of credibility; the National Enquirer has Liz communing with the ghosts of Forbes and one-time husband Richard Burton.
More than 100 reporters, photographers and cameramen converged on St. John's, many of whom had flown in from around the country for the 15-minute press conference.
" sniffed Val Richardson, a reporter from the Washington Times who'd flown in that morning.
At any rate, the news was good.
Taylor was off a respirator and breathing with the help of an oxygen mask.
She had apparently rebounded from a bad weekend, when doctors feared she might die.
And she remains in the intensive-care unit, but she continues to improve and is expected to move to a regular room this weekend, Sam said Thursday.
She couldn't speak because she had the respirator.
"I think she's extraordinarily brave," Sager said.
"She just has an enormous reservoir of inner strength that she calls on when she has to.
All of us were encouraged and optimistic. "
She has needed it.
For somebody like me who is obsessive, it's amazing I was never a gambler," she said at the time.
"I could have become anorexic.
I got to a size 4 and said, 'Why not a size 2?'
When Taylor first checked in, in 1983, she admitted to 35 years of addiction to pain killers and sleeping pills.
She kept a diary that poignantly described that stay as "probably the first time since I was 9 that nobody's wanted to exploit me.
Now the bad news.
I feel like hell.
I'm going through withdrawal.
My heart feels big and pounding.
I can almost see it, running like red water over the boulders in my pain-filled neck and shoulders, then through my ears and into my pounding head.
My eyelids flutter.
Oh God, I am so, so tired."
And the late '80s had found Liz, hobbled by back pain, returning to those two sources of comfort.
And even when she was ambushed recently by a Star photographer, Liz couldn't help being, well, Liz.
It was sad and sweet, at the same time."

