Introduction: The welfare state, the glue that binds the social fabric of the world'sadvanced capitalist economies, is coming unstuck.
The immediate cause is itsincreasing cost at a time when budget deficits burden most of the 24 memberstates of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Rising welfare spending has been a significant factor in the averageincrease in net state borrowing of 3 percentage points of GDP across theOECD between 1989 and 1992.In the longer term, there are fears that the cost of the welfare state couldbecome insupportable as populations age over the next 50 years.
Thebiggest element in this growth has been the cost of pensions, healthcare,unemployment benefits and family support.
The largest single budget item in most welfare states is the cost ofpublicly provided pensions.
The rise in the number of elderly people.
The maturing of the welfare state is also a significant factor in thedoubling of health expenditure since 1960.
Countries such as Spain, Irelandand the Netherlands have been extending their public healthcare systems toprovide universal coverage.
As with pensions, health systems have become more generous in the wake ofeconomic growth - for example, including grafts and transplants that werepreviously regarded as experimental.
Some countries have succeeded in stabilising their welfare costs by measuressuch as these.
The most important of these is demography.
Increases in life expectancy havealready increased the number of elderly people collecting pensions.
Only halfway through the 21stcentury will the number of over-65s peak, at about 190m.
Thestandard measure for this is the age dependency ratio, the population over65 as a percentage of the population aged 15-64.
Germany and Japan, for example, will both have agedependency ratios of 34 per cent by 2020 - one person over the age of 65 forevery three people between 15 and 64.
By 2040, almost half of Germany'spopulation could be over 65, though the proportion will fall thereafter.
Overall, the OECD estimates that the pension burden could double over thenext 50 years.
In practice, increasing pensions in line with prices might be difficult tosustain if earnings rose faster.
The growing gap between pensioners andthose still at work that would result could be politically unacceptable.
The impact of an ageing population on healthcare costs is less clear-cut.
Experts differ on whether increased longevity inevitably means more medicalcare: while more might be required for the very elderly, less might beneeded for younger people as chronic diseases become less common.
Additional costs of new drugs and advances in medical technology could be atleast as important as demography in pushing up healthcare bills.
However, there will be an increase in demand for geriatric care and socialservices for the elderly.
This will be encouraged by social changes, such asthe decline of the extended family in which older people were cared for byyounger relatives.
Other changes in social structure are also pushing up the demands on thewelfare state.
In some countries, the increasehas been relatively moderate - 20 per cent or less in countries such asFrance, Japan and Switzerland.
At the other extreme, the increase hasexceeded 50 per cent in the UK and Australia.
In the US the number has morethan doubled.
Lone-parent families now typically constitute 10-15 per centof of all families with children in OECD countries.
In the US it is one infour families.
The reasons for the growth include the greater ease of separation anddivorce.
Germany, theUK, France, Italy and the US are among countries that have already raisedtax and social security contribution levels.
However, the scope for such increases is limited by voters' reluctance topay higher taxes.
Where the cost of welfare is jointly funded by employers -as in Germany - higher contributions are also increasingly resisted bybusiness, which fears the consequences for international competitiveness ofhigher costs.
It says this is 'asituation which most would think unsustainable'.This is why the OECD's half-yearly Economic Outlook repeatedly stresses theimportance of controlling welfare spending in improving economicperformance.
Tackling these longer-term pressures will require more than tinkering withcharges and efficiency drives in welfare services.
Significant cuts in benefit levels, for example, may be needed - includinggreater targeting of benefits on the most needy.
User charges could becomeincreasingly widespread, especially for the better-off.
They could rise tocover a much larger part of the costs of welfare services.
And the demandsput on the welfare state might be eased by encouraging more privateprovision of pensions and healthcare.
Measures such as these would fundamentally change the nature of the welfarestate, however.
As countries become wealthier, moving the boundary between the state'sresponsibilities and those of the individual in this way may be a naturalstep.
But it would be politically controversial.
The welfarestate may have effectively bound societies together through the ups anddowns of the economic cycle for the past 40 years.
This is the first in a series of articles analysing the pressures on thewelfare state across the world, and examining policy options for relievingthe strain
