The deaths of two blacks at a drug raid that went awry, followed10 days later by a scuffle between police and blacks at a downtownhotel, touched off an outcry by minority leaders for an outsidereview of the department.
``It's like a watch spring.
There will be no tolerance forthat type of inexcusable behavior.''
Some, including Hayden, say that image now blocks progress.
Everyone always says, `Ican't believe this is happening in Minnesota, in Minneapolis, thehome of progressiveness.'
That is real tricky,'' Hayden said.
In a series of rallies in recent weeks, protesters demanded thatofficers involved in the drug raid be suspended, charges againstthose arrested at the hotel be dropped, and that a citizen policereview board be established.
``There are bad apples in every bunch and the Minneapolis PoliceDepartment is no exception,'' said Councilwoman Sayles Belton.
``Idon't think they (the good officers) are pleased with the few thatare giving them the bad rap _ the spoilers.''
No one conducting the raid knew the elderly people were livingthere, said Laux.
Partygoers alleged that officers used the term``nigger,'' and beat some of those arrested.
Laux said his officershave denied using racial names and said protesters lied about thenumber of people receiving medical attention following the arrests.
Gleason Glover, president of the Minneapolis Urban League, whichworks for interracial cooperation, said police racism has been aproblem since he took over the league position 21 years ago.
``The matter of police misconduct and brutality has been going onfor at least the 21 years I've been here, but I think the deathspushed the issue beyond the point of tolerance that usually is thecase in matters of police misconduct,'' Glover said.
Allegations of police misconduct currently are reviewed by apanel appointed by the mayor.
The panel can only makerecommendations.
``The key point is that any time the head of the policedepartment cannot hire, fire or impose discipline, you are no longerin charge,'' he said.
Laux said the 750-member department, which includes 62 minoritymembers and 68 white women, will begin cultural awareness trainingfor all officers, probably this fall.
``But it must be thoughtful and be doneby the right people.
''
