In the American mind, welfare has become synonymous with such evils as urbandecay, fatherless children, drug abuse and violent crime.
It claims both measures will help shift people offwelfare by 'making work pay.
'The budget advanced this cause by expanding the earned income tax credit (akind of negative income tax).
In addition, the administration promises to bolster the economic position ofwelfare mothers by strictly enforcing laws requiring absent fathers tosupport their children financially.
Such measures should help.
But they are hardly going to solve America'swelfare problem, which differs substantially from that in Europe.
Once peopleaccept that benefits are not going to be paid indefinitely, they argue,behaviour will change.
Teenagers will stop having babies and startrecognising the economic advantages of marriage.
At first the adjustment will be horribly painfulbut in the longer term society will gain enormously because destructivelifestyles will no longer be underwritten.
With its economic life supportsystem (welfare) ripped away, the underclass will shrivel.
Ifwelfare stops, something has to take its place.
One suggestion is that MrClinton should follow the example of Roosevelt's Works ProgressAdministration, an agency that at its peak created over 3m public sectorjobs.
Mothers with young children would also be offered state child carefacilities.
Thisrecognised the impossibility of ending welfare overnight and instead settargets for the gradual introduction of 'workfare'.
Next year states willreceive federal assistance only if they ensure that at least 15 per cent ofthe 'employable' welfare case load is working or in training programmes; by1995 the required ratio rises to 20 per cent.
Mr Clinton could tighten the definition of 'employable', so as to includemothers with children under the age of three, and set more demandingworkfare participation targets, for example that 50 per cent of welfarerecipients should be working or in training by the year 2000.
Such agradualist approach would be both humane and cost effective.
The onlytrouble is that it falls far short of the presidential promise to 'endwelfare as we know it'.
Like Mr Bush, Mr Clinton may have raisedexpecta-tions that simply cannot be met.
