""We are standing at thethreshold of civil war.
The independent television station Yutel quoted a federal officialas saying the government did not approve of the military statement.
Earlier Saturday evening, Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic forced yetanother delay in the election of Stipe Mesic, a Croat, as president ofYugoslavia.
Such a meetingmight have resolved the leadership vacuum in the federal government.
Preparations for hostilities were widespread.
Thepeace package was assembled by federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic, brokeredby an emergency mission of the European Community and accepted by the leadersof Slovenia and Croatia, as well as Serbia.
The Slovenian government charged the army withrepeated breaches of the cease-fire and demanded the surrender of army unitsand installations that Slovenian forces had surrounded and cut off since thefighting began Thursday.
'No wayback'"There is no way back from Slovenian independence," he told reportersin Ljubljana.
The only possibility in this connection is her forcedannexation.
Casualties mountAtleast 40 people were killed in the first two days of fighting in Slovenia,including 20 federal army soldiers, four Slovenian fighters and 12 civilians,said Janez Jansa, the Slovenian defense minister.
He estimated that the tollmight actually be twice as high.
Ljubljana, the Slovenian capital, was anarmed camp, where armed civilians and territorial guards stopped people atrandom and demanded identification cards.
Driving across the republic, whichis about the size of Maryland, was difficult because of checkpoints byterritorial guards, barricades of trucks or the wrecks of Slovenian vehiclesdestroyed by Yugoslav government tanks.
In Zagreb, the Croatian capital, federalmilitary aircraft flew low, and federal garrisons stood on full alert.
Croatian PresidentFranjo Tudjman said his republic was not hoping for a fight but was ready ifneed be.
"Butif we are attacked, we will respond.
Thecrisis evoked further expressions of anguish from foreign leaders, and for thefirst time a high-placed U.S. official hinted that the administration may beweighing the possibility of recognizing Croatia and Slovenia. "
The presidentand the secretary (of state) have never said 'never,' " Deputy Secretary ofState Lawrence Eagleburger said in a television interview.
The only other U.S.diplomatic post in Yugoslavia is in Belgrade, the federal capital.

