It seems that the Abu-Nidal group is not the only party responsible for the operation.
In this investigative report AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI reveals the details of this network, the secret meetings it held in Tehran, Amsterdam, and Beirut, the names of those who planned and carried out the assassination, the centers where they were trained, their affiliations, and how this leads to exposing dangerous secrets which made the Abu-Nidal group send threat letters to those in charge of the investigation.
At the same time, AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI has learned that the Abu- Nidal group recently sent threat letters to Lebanese officials who are currently investigating its members who are involved in the al- Ma'ayitah assassination.
These are: Yusuf Sha'ban, Bassam Muhammad 'Attiyah, and Yusuf 'Udwani, codenamed Salim Mahyub.
Lebanese investigator, Judge Sa'id Mirza ordered the arrest of the three Palestinians and listened to the deposition of three witnesses, including 'Afaf Yusuf [not further identified] who reiterated her previous deposition.
The IMYO was exposed in Jordan by Jordanian authorities on 17 August 1992 when the Jordanian security bodies confiscated weapons and ammunition the organization had been hiding in Jordan to be used to destablize the regime and security in the country.
At the time, two members of Parliament were arrested; Ya'qub Qirrish anbd Layth Shubaylat on chrages of heading the organization.
Most of the factions left for Lebanon where they found the suitable atmosphere and the appropriate place to carry out their activities in cooperation with Hizballah.
Ayatollah Shakhiry [name as transliterated], the official in charge of the Jordan section in the Iranian intelligence organ, took charge of this office.
The official in charge of the Jordanian elements was Shakir Abu-Jami', a Jordanian national wanted by authorities in his country and one of the most prominent members of the Jordanian fundamentalist Muhammad Army Organization.
Abu-Jami' now lives in Sa'dah, Yemen, which is home to camps for Afghan and Arab fundamentalists.
The information says that the scheme was designed some two years ago and the Muslim Brotherhood Movement in Jordan refused to get involved in it because of the danger and because the Brotherhood Movement does not agree with the proposals of other fundamentalist organizations.
The information confirms that Abu-Nidal group's leadership agreed to execute the mission for the aforesaid reasons, because of its commitment to the policy of extremism and rejection that aims at torpedoing the [peace] process, and because of its ties to Iran within the framework of international terrorism.
The plan to assassinate al-Ma'ayitah was drafted during these meetings.
But why did the Abu-Nidal group and the IMYO choose to assassinate Na'ib al-Ma'ayitah and not any other Jordanian official in the Beirut embassy.
To carry out the assassination, an intensive training course was conducted for the Palestinians Bassam 'Atiyah and Yusuf 'Adwani in a secret center run by Abu-Nidal group in Buq'atah in Lebanon's al- Shuf area under the supervision of a Palestinian expert in assassinations called A. al-'Umayri [not further identified].
Al- ' Umayri was implicated in the assassination of the FRC official Bahij Abu-al-Hana in July 1992 in Lebanon's al-Biqa' area, after he accused him of contacting the 'Arafat-led Fatah movement.
Confirmed security information says a Jordanian fundamentalist took part in the assassination of al-Ma'ayitah.
He was charged with observation and backup when the assassination was carried out.
The man is called Khalid al-Bishtawi, 34 years old.
The FRC (Abu-Nidal group) took immediate steps after al- Ma'ayitah's assassination.
It made changes within the ranks of its officials and moved some of them outside Lebanon and changed the secret apartments it owns in Beirut and the southern part of Sidon.
It seems that the investigations will not stop at this point in Beirut or Amman.
In an apparent attempt to prevent the revelation of further details, the leadership of the Abu-Nidal group urged King Husayn to "give it a chance to explain its position."

