And the bestviewing spots are virtually in California's back yard: The Big Island ofHawaii and the southern Baja California peninsula.
Unfortunately, you canprobably forget about seeing it, because, unless you get lucky, you can't getthere from here anymore.
"It's an event, and it rarely, rarelyhappens.
"The eclipse will be seen from Hawaii tocentral Brazil.
If clouds don't spoil the show, viewers along that path willsee the moon slip slowly in front of the sun.
Stars will shine.
The length of this"period of totality," as it's known, will depend on where viewers are alongthe path.
The eclipse will last the longest -- six minutes and 58 seconds --at the center of the shadow in the town of Tuxpan, on Mexico's west coast.
Inthe Bay Area, the moon will cover about 55 percent of the sun's surface.
"The effect of it -- the view of seeing the sundisappear little by little and then actually having the (blue) sky disappearand having the birds stop singing -- it's miraculous," said Irving Hochman, amember of the San Francisco Amateur Astronomers.
"Bob Bruynesteyn, head of the SanMateo Astronomical Society, puts it succinctly: "Not too many people havestood in the shadow of the moon.
Pamela and Daniel Dei Rossi of Campbell were among those scramblers.
They called places where relatives had stayed inMexico.
No luck.
Then, good fortunestruck.
The Dei Rossis were in.
"Weare so excited," Pamela Dei Rossi said.
"We had given up.
One isto go by the back door.
Butafter enveloping the Big Island and then slicing across southern Baja, themoon's shadow will cross the Gulf of California and race across the southernflank of Mexico and down the west coast of Central America.
Two of Mexico'sbiggest cities, Gaudalajara and Mexico City, lie in the path of totality.
Sodoes Mazatlan.
Travelers who can't produce original documentsshowing they have accommodations will be turned back, Cardenas said.
Even firm reservations may not be all they seem.
Airlines routinely overbookseats, in expectation of no-shows.
With the eclipse, there's concern theoverbooking could be particularly bad, especially on inter-island flights inHawaii.
Special Mylar viewers for safely observing the eclipseare also available for another $2.

