Introduction: The mood in the House majority leader's conference roomdarkened with each passing moment as leading Democraticcongressmen heard one of their party's most prominentpollsters report what the public thought about them.
Another described it as "combustible.
"The Hart-Bailey report found the public "downbeat" aboutthe way the country is going, convinced that Washingtonpoliticians are "more concerned with politicalself-preservation" than with the public good.
Averagecitizens, the pollsters found, believe they "simply are notbeing heard in Washington," and more and more are losingconfidence in the electoral system as a means of influencinggovernment.
Accordingly, these politicians may be in real trouble thisyear.
The 1990 election offered some early warning signs.
True, 96% of all incumbents were re-elected.
Normally, when Republicans have a good year, Democrats'average victory margin declines, and vice versa.
Votersdon't want more conservative or more liberal representation;they want more responsive representation.
This helps explain the strong momentum for limitinglawmakers' terms, a sentiment fueled by the recentdisclosures of the House banking and restaurant fiascos.
Soprogress will be slow.
Congress can make some symbolic moves, however.
It caneliminate its more indefensible perquisites, such as the freeprescription drugs.
But the threat of term limits or of electoraldefeat focuses even the narrowly self-interested mind.
The nexus of many of theproblems -- entrenched arrogance, more concern for powerfulinterests than average citizens and the obscene preoccupationwith campaign contributions -- is the committee system.
While both men are deeply dismayed at the current state ofCongress, they see term limits as a cure worse than theillness. "
Term limits really hit at democracy," says Prof.Fenno.
"But they see a lot of virtue in limiting committeeassignments.
Ferris notes that the current system, in which alawmaker gets a cherished committee assignment in his firstor second term and then stays there for the rest of histenure, breeds staleness. "
There'd be one other incalculable benefit.
This woulddrive the lobbyists crazy.
