Domestically, the move reflects the competitive advantage that regional banks with large loan-loss reserves have over their big brothers in such money centers as New York, Chicago and San Francisco.
Internationally, it appears that it will be even more difficult for economically troubled developing nations to attract new bank loans.
U.S. banks are increasingly splitting into two groups.
On one hand, there is a small group of money-center banks with comparatively thin reserves against large loans to developing countries.
"It's a parting of the ways between the money centers who are out to collect on their assets and the regionals who want to get out," says Lawrence Cohn, an analyst at Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
"It's created an enormous quandary for many money-center banks," Mr. McDermott says.
Management could use their reserve position to emphasize stength when competing for deposits and banking business against larger banks.
That could add to the lending burden for the biggest U.S. banks.
Yesterday, Manufacturers Hanover announced a regular quarterly dividend of 82 cents a share, offering investors a yield of more than 13% annually.
Other large New York banks also declined to disclose their plans, although a spokeman for Chase Manhattan Corp., said, "We're obviously looking at it."
Mellon Bank Corp. said yesterday that it expects a fourth-quarter loss of about $220 million, and that it would increase loan-loss reserves by about $180 million to cover troubled foreign loans.
The stocks of several major money-center banks fell sharply yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Chase Manhattan skidded $2.25 to close at $20.125, Manufacturers Hanover fell $2.375 to $24.25, and J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. was off $1.50 to $30.
"I wouldn't be surprised if some of the medium-sized regionals decided to follow," said Cheryl Swaim, an analyst and vice president at Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
When a loan is placed on non-accrual, a bank only credits interest it actually receives, and doesn't automatically accrue interest due.
Bank of Boston also placed on non-accrual $470 million in loans to less-developed countries that are unrelated to trade.
This doesn't include $170 million in trade-related debt.
First Chicago Corp., the 11th largest banking concern, charged off $48.9 million in Third World loans during the quarter.
And even before the big reserves were set aside, banks were quietly charging off Latin debt, though on a smaller scale.
Last March, Continental Illinois Corp. said it had charged off about half of its $100 million of loans to Peru.

