The spill of some 270,000 barrels _ or 11.3 million gallons _occurred early Friday when the 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez wenthard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 miles outside Valdez, thenorthermost ice-free port in the United States.
An oil slick snaked about five miles from the ship as wind andtide pushed the crude oil into the sound and away from shore.
``This is the largest oil spill in U.S. history and itunfortunately took place in an enclosed water body with numerousislands, channels, bays and fiords,'' said Richard Golob, publisherof the Golob Oil Pollution Bulletin.
Gov.
Steve Cowper said the ship was ``impaled on the reef.''
Lawn likened the ship's situation to ``trying to park a Cadillacin a Volkswagen spot.''
``A spill of this size in such a complex environment promises tobe a cleanup nightmare,'' said Golob, a Cambridge, Mass.-basedconsultant whose firm has studied oil spills and environmentaldisasters for 15 years.
Theship marks the second aniversary of its maiden voyage today.
Valdez, a town of about 3,000 year-round residents that grows tomore than 4,000 with a summer influx of fishing industry workersand travelers, is a picturesque community about 125 miles east ofAnchorage.
It relies on the fishing, oil and tourism industries.
The soundis considered a playground for kayakers, sport fishermen andtourists.
Jason Wells, executive director of the Valdez FisheriesDevelopment Association, said he believed the oil slick would causelittle damage unless wind pushes it back toward Valdez.
The fishingindustry is between seasons.
``It's of concern for two reasons: one is the size of the spilland that this is such a sensitive, very productive area,'' saidLisa Speer, senior staff scientist with the Natural ResourcesDefense Council in New York.
But he added:   ``Living in Valdez, we've always worried that sometime somethinglike this could happen.''
Previously, the largest U.S. tanker spill was the Dec. 15, 1976,grounding of the Argo Merchant tanker off the Nantucket shoals offMassachusetts, in which 7.6 million gallons of oil spilled, Golobsaid.
The largest tanker spill in history was in the July 19, 1979,collision off Tobago of the supertankers Atlantic Empress andAegean Captain, in which 300,000 tons _ more than 80 milliongallons _ of oil was lost.
