Introduction: A French DC-10 jetliner with 171 people aboard experienced a powerful high-altitude explosion, possibly from a terrorist bomb, before crashing in a remote desert region of Niger in northern Africa, officials in France said Wednesday.
Included among the presumed dead was the wife of the American ambassador to Chad.
On Wednesday, Michel Friess, a spokesman for UTA, said that "the wide surface over which the debris of the airplane has been found suggests a high-altitude explosion that leads one to think of a criminal attack."
Saying he was reading a statement from Islamic Jihad, the London caller declared: "We are proud of this action, which was very successful.
We demand the freedom of Sheik Obeid, and otherwise we will refresh the memories of the bombings in Paris of '85 and '86.
Long live the Islamic Republic of Iran."
A more likely possibility, speculated terrorist experts and one intelligence source in Washington, was a terrorist attack on behalf of pro-Syrian Muslim forces in Lebanon.
"The pieces are widely scattered, so it didn't crash on impact," a Foreign Ministry spokesman said.
Air controllers lost contact with UTA Flight 772 less than an hour after it took off from N'Djamena.
UTA officials insisted that the DC-10 was in good working condition, having completed 60,000 hours of flying time on 14,700 flights in 16 years of service.
Since it was formed in 1949, UTA, which specializes in African and Pacific routes, had never experienced a crash during a commercial flight.
Twenty-five people on board were injured in that attack, which the Chadian government blamed on Libya.
Chad-Libyan relations have recently normalized after a 10-year guerrilla war.
"We can't at this time state for a fact that (the plane) was blown up, but it does have those appearances," he said.
It seems to me that there's a much stronger Middle Eastern context than an African context," Hoffman said.
This would send a pretty clear message to France that they ought to back away," Hoffman added.
Three days later, Hezbollah threatened to stage suicide attacks against French targets.
An Air France flight on Aug. 28 was delayed for more than five hours before taking off from Dulles International Airport in Washington when security officials received a last-minute bomb threat.
"In these people's eyes, we're really talking about Lebanon's future.
"The last battle for Beirut has yet to be fought."
"If it's not the beginning of the end of things there, it's certainly the opening of a new wave of conflicts there," agreed another analyst, Jim Blackwell of Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Another analyst at the center, Robert Kupperman, discounted the possibility that a small terrorist group alone could have been responsible for the airborne bombing. "
When someone puts a bomb on the plane, it normally takes the resources of a state, at least to set it up," Kupperman said.
Apart from Syrian-backed Lebanese forces, Kupperman suggested that Libya and Iran also could have been motivated to stage such an attack.
Included among the passengers was Bonnie Pugh, wife of the U.S. ambassador to Chad, Robert L. Pugh.
The State Department said six other Americans were aboard.
Mrs. Pugh was on her way to the United States for her daughter's wedding, according to her sister, Sally Johnson, of Brawley, Calif.
The ambassador's wife, who was born in Los Angeles in the 1920s and later moved to the Imperial Valley, had decided to travel ahead of her husband to help plan the October wedding of their 26-year-old daughter Anne in suburban Washington, D.C. Another passenger aboard the plane was Chadian Planning Minister Mahamat Soumaila, en route to Washington to attend a meeting of the International Monetary Fund.
Most of the passengers were African.
Tempest reported from Paris and Mann from Washington.
Times staff writer Douglas Jehl, in Washington, contributed to this story.

