Do you sense an outbreak of sanity about gun control?
I do.
There was retired Chief Justice Warren Burger preaching sacrilege on the cover of Parade magazine a couple of weeks ago.
A Time Magazine/Cable News Network poll reports that 87% of gun owners themselves favor a seven-day waiting period for handgun purchases; three-quarters favor registration of semi-automatic weapons and handguns, and half favor registration of rifles and shotguns.
Unfortunately, there is the Second Amendment to the Constitution: "A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed. "
That reasoning is good enough for the ACLU.
Say, the First?
But liberals reject the notion that free speech is therefore limited to political topics, even broadly defined.
But why leap to the conclusion that a broadly worded constitutional freedom ("the right of the people to keep and bear arms") is narrowly limited by its stated purpose, unless you're trying to explain it away?
The fact that once upon a time everyone was a member of the militia doesn't prove that everyone still has a right to a gun even after the composition of the militia has changed.
If there is a good reply to Kates's fusillade, the controllers haven't made it.
Of course the existence of an individual right to own guns doesn't mean that it is absolute.
What are the limits?
(No nuclear bombs.)
He adds that they must be light enough for an ordinary person to carry ("bear"), and even that they can't be especially "dangerous or unusual."
This list seems quite reasonable and moderate, though where it all comes from is not clear.
The downside of having a Bill of Rights is that the protection of individual rights usually entails social costs.
This is as true of the Second Amendment as it is of the First, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth.
It would be remarkable indeed if none of the Bill of Rights became less sensible and more burdensome with time.
Talking and writing are as central to American democracy as they ever were; shooting just isn't.
But the right is still there.

