Introduction:JEZERSKO, Yugoslavia -- On Wednesday, the Slovene soldiersmanning this border post raised a new flag to mark Slovenia'sindependence from Yugoslavia.
Accompanied by tanks, jet fighters,helicopters, the regular troops, including paratroopers,battled Slovene militiamen across the breakaway republic.
Local militiamen shot down a federalarmy helicopter as it flew over the capital, killing thepilot and co-pilot, the Associated Press reported.
He claimed six government helicopters had beendowned. "
Four people hadbeen killed and 14 hurt Wednesday.
The first shooting between the federal army and themilitias occurred here, in the mountains that mark the borderwith Austria.
Throughout the morning, federal soldiers, somebearing bazookas, fanned out in the woods surrounding theSlovenia customs house.
Meanwhile, tanks and artillery woundup the narrow mountain pass.
The blasts left holes in the roof and walls and shatteredwindows in the house.
Here, the drama was watched by several Yugoslavstrying to return to their country from Austria; the cooks,waitresses and a few guests at restaurants on both sides ofthe border; several tourists who were caught on the Yugoslavside; and a dozen Austrian customs officers and policemen.
Those on the Austrian side gathered near the restaurant'sbeer garden and watched through binoculars as the armysoldiers moved through the forest, and then they scrambledfor cover when shots were fired.
No spectators were harmed.
"Yesterday we had a big party, and today we're fighting,"moaned Bogataj Vejko, a truck driver from near Ljubljana, whohad safely crossed the border early in the morning and wasnow trying to get back home.
"We were hoping it wouldn't cometo this."
After the shooting stopped, he talked to a group ofthe federal soldiers, and discovered that some wereconscripts from Slovenia. "
This is what we have come to," hesaid. "
Slovenes shooting at Slovenes.
Now I'll go at themmyself," he joked.
Then he turned serious, scoffing, "Someindependence.
"If we want ourfreedom, we will now have to defend it.
He called on Slovenes in the federalarmy to desert and join the republic's militia.
In Croatia,officials also vowed to defend their sovereignty.
But the poorly trained and equipped Slovene and Croatianmilitias, formed in the past several months, are no match forthe 180,000-strong federal army.
The local militias also havenothing to counter the central government's several thousandtanks and other armored vehicles, not to mention thegovernment's air forces.
So far, no foreigncountries have recognized Slovenian and Croatianindependence.
On the contrary, the European Community and theU.S.
The federal army, dominated by Serbs, has long warned thatit won't stand by while the country disintegrates.
They are also Yugoslavia's gateway toWestern Europe.
