The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 37.16 points to close at 2094.24, while U.S. government bonds fell more than 1 1/2 points.
Grain and soybean futures continued their drought-driven rally.
President Reagan appointed an interagency group to deal with the drought and Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng authorized farmers in drought parched counties in 13 states to harvest hay on idled crop land in the government's Conservation Reserve Program.
We've already seen some increases in some products."
But he said the administration doesn't believe the drought will have "overall implications for the economy."
This program is designed to boost farm exports by reimbursing U.S. exporters for the difference between the prices they receive for grain and other commodities in world markets and higher U.S. prices. "
But Mr. Yeutter said he would "vigorously" oppose any embargo on U.S. soybean exports.
Earlier this week, Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng took an equally adamant stand against such an embargo.
Tractor sales by farm equipment dealers were up 12.8% during the first five months of the year.
Now, with farmers in many Midwest states expecting smaller harvests this year, these businesses are seeing their new-found trade evaporating.
"People are borrowing minimal amounts."
But all bets are off on how farmers will fare at the end of this year's harvests.
If farmers are strapped for cash this year, the effects would ripple throughout the farm economy.
If the drought continues, he says, "it could bring us to our knees again."
In Franklin, Tenn., implement dealer Larry Holt is slashing his fall orders by one-third, even though sales so far this year are up roughly 25%.
He expects sales for the rest of this year to drop 10% to 20% from the second-half of 1987.
J.I.
Case, the farm implement-making unit of Tenneco Inc., is considering cutting production schedules if the drought continues through July.
"It's already getting harder to sell farmers tractors because of the drought," says James K. Ashford, Case president and chief executive officer.
Among rural banks, loan problems are expected to rise and profits to fall. "
Many rural lenders this spring were banking on farmers losing some of their post-farm crisis inhibitions about going into hock.
The land boom is wilting.
Because of the drought, Iowa realtors expect land prices to rise somewhat less than the 5% to 10% they had been expecting.
"Everybody has just kind of pulled in their horns," says Jim Frevert, vice president of Hertz Farm Management Inc., Nevada, Iowa.
Most of the farmers who have bought land recently did so for cash, but many of the urban investors got in on credit, real estate agents say.
"I'm here for the capital gain over the long haul," he says.
The drought is also fanning wildly different predictions of how the farm economy will turn next year.
Some economists think high crop prices will spark more planting, which would benefit agribusiness, while others think farmers will start the next growing season more conservative.
"Both borrowers and lenders have developed pretty good memories."
The decision by Mr. Lyng, the secretary of agriculture, to allow hay-mowing for 30 days on Conservation Reserve Program land came as farmers and ranchers in North Dakota, Minnesota and other states continued to sell off livestock in response to shortages of hay and other forage crops.
Nationwide, pasture conditions on June 1 were the worst they have been since 1934, according to the Agriculture Department.
Mr. Lyng's order covers counties where livestock-grazing and hay-mowing on so-called set-aside acres already has been authorized, and the drought's effects have been rated as "severe."
Every county in North Dakota meets these criteria.
The department said it won't allow livestock-grazing on land in the soil-conservation program, under which farmers are paid to take erodible acreage out of crop production.

