Introduction: In a blow to California and other states with large immigrant populations, the Senate voted Friday to bar the Census Bureau from counting illegal aliens in the 1990 population count.
"I'm stunned," said Santa Ana City Council member Miguel A. Pulido.
The city has been lobbying hard to have its illegal alien population -- estimated at 50,000 -- included in the 1990 count.
Just before the voice vote, the senators voted, 50 to 41, against killing the proposal to bar aliens from the count.
A Senate-House conference committee will decide whether the prohibition against including illegal immigrants in the census totals will be retained or dropped from a $17.4-billion appropriations bill for the State, Justice and Commerce departments.
Federal aid to states also is frequently based on population counts, so millions of dollars in grants and other funds made available on a per capita basis would be affected.
State officials have said California could lose up to $300 million in federal aid if illegal aliens were uncounted.
Santa Ana has estimated its potential loss at $2 million a year.
In 1985, before the federal immigration reform act, the number of illegal aliens in Orange County was estimated at 229,000, ranking it just behind Los Angeles County in California, a county official said.
There are no current estimates.
"Those individuals, when asked or challenged about their status, can be legitimately concerned.
But Pulido said he believes the House of Representatives will not allow the prohibition to survive, especially since it killed an earlier, similar effort.
Loss of Seats Cited "Some states will lose congressional seats because of illegal aliens," Dole argued.
Sen. Thad Cochran (R-Miss.)
"The bottom line is illegal aliens ought to be deported, not counted," Cochran said.
Westminster is following a recommendation by the Census Bureau to form a Complete Count Committee of officials and community leaders to help ensure cooperation from all city residents.
The Community Development Block Grant formula, among other things, Vestal said, includes use of income figures and percentage of lower income residents in the city. "
Gloria McDonough, director of Abrazar Center, an elderly-assistance center for Latinos in Westminster, said the senators' action shows they have no understanding of the impact of illegal immigration to California communities.
"Whether you count them or not, the undocumented residents are still going to impact federal dollars in our community.
And whether we like it or not they're here and here to stay," McDonough said.
"Their big thing was, 'We do not care about the origins of where these people are from, but, more importantly, their impact to local economies,' " she said.
For 190 years, said Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-N.Y.), the federal government has counted all inhabitants without regard to citizenship in accordance with the Constitution's provisions.
Mario Moreno, head of the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund, said he was shocked by the Senate's decision.
"It is going to have a dramatic and disastrous impact in the Hispanic community," Moreno said.
"People are going to be discouraged from participating."

