Introduction:   From a helicopter , the wave-washedbeach looks as if the worst oil spill in U.S. history had nevertouched it.
Silvery sticks of driftwood poke through a deep blanket of snow,and smooth gray pebbles roll in the surf under the gaze of a baldeagle perched in a shoreside spruce.
But the view doesn't impress Joe Bridgman of the AlaskaDepartment of Environmental Conservation.
Dashing out as thechopper lands, he digs into the cobble beach and quickly finds whathe knew he would.
``Oil,'' he says.
``Smell it?''
A rainbow sheen of oil spreads across thewater.
``Hundreds of gallons of oil are locked up under this beach,''he says.
``And this isn't isolated.
There are hundreds of beachesall over the sound that are still oiled, and the oil is slowlybleeding out.
``The beaches can look beautiful at the surface, but you can digdown, in this case just a few inches below the surface, and findlots of oil.
Now, is that a threat or isn't it?''
Certainly, the worst isover; thousands of dead birds no longer wash up on shorelines asthey did last summer.
But assessing the continuing damage wrought by the nation's mostextensive _ and expensive _ oil spill has just begun.
Any hope of a quick solution faded last summer as oil from theExxon Valdez spread across 1,100 miles of Alaska's wild southerncoast.
That leaves 50 percent to75 percent of the oil in the water, on the ocean bottom or onbeaches.
Many of Prince William Sound's 3,000 bald eagles also suffered;at least 151 died, most poisoned by scavenging the oily remains ofsome of the 34,400 dead seabirds recovered.
``We never claimed that the spill put any animal on theendangered species list, but that's missing the point,'' said Fishand Wildlife spokesman Bruce Batten.
``It's still the greatesthuman-caused wildlife disaster that this agency knows about.''
Oily carcasses were an obvious measure of the spill's impact,but victims also included less visible members of the ecosystem,such as young salmon and tiny intertidal creatures.
Capt.
Fishermen sued because of lost seasons.
Information about the spill is filtered through this litigiousatmosphere, making much of it suspect.
