Introduction:Backed by public antipathy toward the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster, Gov.
After meeting personally with top executives from three of the seven oil companies that own the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. earlier in the week, Cowper asked them to respond by noon Thursday to his six-point safety plan.
An aide to the governor described the companies' response as "generally OK" but said that Cowper may issue an order putting his plan into effect anyway.
In one proposed draft of an order, continuation of routine operations at the Alyeska Marine Terminal near the town of Valdez is described as creating "a substantial potential risk of additional oil spill" because the consortium has failed to demonstrate it can manage a large spill with minimal environmental effects.
To reduce the risk, the order, which could be issued as soon as today, would require:  -- A written description, due within 72 hours of the order's being signed, of the location of all oil-spill gear at the consortium's disposal.
Equipment must be dedicated to oil-spill cleanup only.
Installation of Booms  -- The installation of containment booms around all oil tankers in the harbor.
-- Permanent restriction of tanker traffic to daylight hours.
"We want the oil industry to be ready for a spill of this magnitude if it happens tomorrow," Cowper said.
If it isn't complied with, we don't have any remedy available to us except shut down the terminal.
State law gives the governor the authority to close the terminal if it does not meet state oil-cleanup plan requirements.
Meanwhile, the chairman of Exxon Corp. told Congress Thursday that the third mate who was on the bridge of the Exxon Valdez when it ran aground has told company lawyers that he turned off the ship's automatic pilot in an effort to avoid the reef. "
Tom Kilpatrick of the California Maritime Academy, a former captain himself, said autopilots take full control of a ship once they are switched on.
"The helm will not respond if it's in autopilot," he said.
"That should be the first clue to people on the bridge that the autopilot is on."
A Coast Guard official in Anchorage said the third mate in charge of the tanker shortly before it went aground did complain of being unable to get the vessel to respond to the helm.
However, favorable winds were still keeping most of the crude offshore, he said.
Justice Thomas Starke said the earlier bail amount was "unconstitutionally excessive."
He called the spill "the worst man-made disaster since Hiroshima."
Douglas Jehl contributed to this story from Washington.

