Exxon also disclosed that the Long Beach-bound tanker actually was involved in two separate accidents that night in pristine Prince William Sound.
Many questions about the disaster remained unanswered.
Still unexplained is why Third Mate Gregory Cousins was steering the 987-foot vessel through the tricky, iceberg-dotted waters on Friday.
At no time did the ship lose steering, he added.
Iarossi said he did not know whether Hazelwood took the wheel after the first accident, or how much time elapsed between the two incidents.
There would have been no reason for the 42-year-old captain to go below to use the bathroom or get coffee, since both are available on the bridge, Iarossi said.
Puts Off Filing Charges "We're not going to file any charges until we are done with our investigation," said Coast Guard spokesman Todd Nelson.
Nelson said piloting a ship without proper certification is a civil, not criminal, violation, which ultimately could result in suspension or revocation of the captain's license.
Exxon has not made any of the Exxon Valdez's 20 crew members available for interviews.
A team from the National Transportation Safety Board arrived Sunday to probe the cause of the accident.
Experts from the International Bird Rescue Center in Berkeley, Calif., set up a rehabilitation center here Sunday in case oiled birds are captured.
Otter experts from Hubbs Marine Research Institute at Sea World in San Diego were due to arrive today.
But even if animals turn up in distress, rescues may not be feasible.
A monitor from the U.S.
"The reason we haven't seen a large number of birds affected so far is that the oil is out in the middle of the sound," said Everett Robinson-Wilson, the agency's environmental contaminant coordinator.
"The weather will help us or kill us," he added.
Winds of up to 35 m.p.h.
were expected by today.
The Exxon Valdez spewed about 250,000 barrels of North Slope crude into the ice-blue waters.
Another 1 million barrels remain aboard the damaged ship, but no new leakage has been reported.
Pumps were being used to siphon the remaining oil into a sister tanker Sunday, an operation expected to take up to a week.
Up to $20 Million Damages Iarossi estimated damage to the $125-million ship at $10 million to $20 million.
Videotapes filmed by divers revealed 10 sizable holes in the ship's hull, ranging from 8 feet by 15 feet to 20 feet by 6 feet, Iarossi said.
No disciplinary action has been taken against any crew members, Iarossi said.
At Coast Guard offices here, Nelson said such a move was unlikely. "
"That would just slow things down. "
