``It is expected that this will be the case for all lightlyoiled Gulf of Alaska sites,'' said the two-part, 60-page report.
``We are going to have to take a hard look at that,'' respondedBill Lamoreaux, the ranking state environmental official monitoringthe cleanup.
Signs of the spill have been sightedabout 500 miles southwest of Valdez.
The oil company's strategy, which was submitted to state andfederal authorities only hours before a deadline expired, dividesAlaska's oil-tainted shores into four categories _ from the mostheavily polluted to those that are ``only lightly oiled.''
The worst areas _ three miles of sludge-covered beaches onseveral small islands _ would be targeted immediately, with theothers scheduled for gradual cleansing through Sept. 15.
Both methods likelywill require exemptions from local environmental laws.
Coast Guard Adm. Paul A. Yost Jr., the ranking federal officialtracking the cleanup, told reporters in Sacramento, Calif. that hewould decide whether to approve the proposal within a week.
The damage stretches along 260 miles of rocky, rugged coastlinesouthwestward from Cape Douglas some 500 miles from Valdez, parksuperintendent Ray Bane said Monday.
``The oil has made landfall in large quantities in Katmai Bayand Hallo Bay.
There is a heavy impact.
We have seen severalhundred sea otters swimming in oil.
The oil has had an impact onvirtually the entire coastline of the park,'' Bane said.
The 4 million-acre park also is a haven for brown bears, acoastal cousin of the grizzly.
``A number of bears have been seenwalking in the vicinity of the beaches.
We have one verifiedsighting of a bear walking through the oil,'' Bane said.
Exxon also received sharp criticism from the federal government,which accused the company of ``foot-dragging'' in the constructionof a second facility in Seward to aid in the cleanup of sea ottersfouled by the oil.
The animals depend on their thick fur forinsulation against the cold water but the oil ruins the insulationeffect.
