Management sources at TransManche Link, the constructionconsortium building the ``Chunnel'' - the Channel Tunnel -confirmed the historic linkup occurred about 8:25 p.m. when Britishworkers sent the probe through to French colleagues.
``It is an example of what Europe is about,'' British PrimeMinister Margaret Thatcher said in London.
``This is Europe inpractice.''
The Chunnel is scheduled for completion in June 1993.
The basic goal of the Channel Tunnel project is to enablepassengers to travel between London and Paris in about three hours.
The conservative Daily Express newspaper noted in its Wednesdayeditions that Britons would theoretically be able to walk to Francefor the first time since the last Ice Age.
The cost of the project has soared from an initial estimate of$9.4 billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion forunforeseen cost overruns.
The meeting point was just over 13{ miles southeast ofShakespeare Cliff, the British terminus near the town of Dover, and10 miles northwest of the French town of Sangatte, near Calais.
French workers reaching the tiny hole telephoned their Britishcounterparts and relayed the news to TransManche officials.
Thefirst champagne corks popped minutes later.
``It's an exciting moment.
It's the first time we have airpassing between the two tunnels,'' said Gordon Crighton, tunnelengineering manager.
Preliminary tests indicated the two halves were 20 inches out ofalignment.
Another day will be needed to be certain, technicianssaid, but they called the line-up ``exceptional,'' considering themassive boring machines are drilling holes about three storieshigh.
Two Japanese-designed boring machines are drilling the tunnel.
After it is finished, one will be dismantled and hauled out inpieces.
The other will drill its own grave and be buried in cementbecause French officials said it will be too costly to extricateit.
Taking into account all the tunnels, 80 percent of the drillinghas been completed by giant, Japanese-built boring machines workingfrom Calais and Folkstone, England.
President Francois Mitterrand and Mrs. Thatcher are expected tomeet each other in the tunnel Jan. 26, after the digging for muchof the tunnel is finished.
The first coupling of the two railtunnels is scheduled for mid-1991.
More than 200 banks are involved in thefinancing.
Officials estimate the tunnel may carry 28 million passengers inthe first year of operation, although Eurotunnel doesn't expect aprofit until the end of the century.
Napoleon wanted to build it, but Britain warned him off.
Tunneling actually started in subsequent efforts in 1882 and 1974,but were abandoned.
