And one forecaster says hurricane seasons may be getting worse.
Hugo, which caused an unprecedented $10 billion in damage,killed 28 people in the Lesser Antilles islands and an additional29 in South Carolina.
But it would have been much more deadly if it had hit almostanywhere else, says Bob Sheets, director of the National HurricaneCenter.
At the advent of the Atlantic hurricane season, which runs fromJune 1 to Nov. 30, Sheets and other hurricane experts are usingHugo's example to get the attention of complacent coastal residentswho've never experienced such fury.
``Theconsequences of not being prepared are too great.''
Early warnings about Hugo last September allowed 350,000 peopleto evacuate safely, and in South Carolina the worst of thehurricane struck the Francis Marion National Forest betweenCharleston and Myrtle Beach, Sheets said.
It heavily damaged the fishing village of McClellanville andseveral small rural communities, but the population there is sparse.
``Compare that situation to the Miami-through-Palm Beach area_ all of Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties would have been ...destroyed.''
Hugo was the worst hurricane to strike the southeastern U.S.coast since Betsy hit the Florida Keys in 1965, killing 74 beforeit went on to Missisippi and Louisiana.
Gray came to this conclusion after his usually accuratepredictions for hurricane activity were off the mark last year.
``But then he looked atthe rainfall over Africa, and found an amazing correlation betweenrainfall there and hurricane activity over Florida.''
Gray realized the 30-year drought in Africa's Sahel regioncorresponds almost exactly to the years when no major hurricaneshave struck the southeastern coast.
``Whether one causes the other is uncertain.
They both mayreflect larger-scale events.
But the Sahel is now getting up tonear-normal rainfall,'' Sheets said.
Gray plans to release his predictions for 1990 on June 5.
Tropical storms have been recorded in the Atlantic in everymonth except April, but are rare outside the June 1 to Nov. 30season.
