Last year was one of fewer than normal tornado deaths, but evenso, more than 700 of the violent funnel clouds struck the nation.
In 1988 the nation recorded 32 tornado deaths, down from the 59killed a year earlier and well below the long-term average of 99fatalities annually, the National Weather Service reported on Sunday.
Meteorologists have attributed the decline in tornado deaths inrecent years to increased public awareness of the storms, which aremost common in May and June but can occur in any month of the year.
Last year also recorded the largest tornado outbreak in 14 years.
That outbreak didn'tcause any deaths, although 10 injuries were reported.
Four peoplewere killed in North Carolina and two each in Mississippi andNebraska.
States with a single fatality apiece were Kentucky,Michigan, Missouri, New York, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas.
After a low point in the winter they begin to increase sharply inMarch and peak in May with a national average of 166 twisters inthat month, according to records kept at the National Climatic DataCenter.
Other months averaging more than atwister-a-day somewhere in the nation are July, 82; August, 57;March, 50 and September, 38.
But while an individual twister can cover only a small area, theyoften come in groups and in the affected area destruction can betotal.
When twisters are in an area, common sense and knowing a fewsimple rules can save lives, the National Weather Service says.
If tornadoes threaten, turn on radio or television to keepcurrent on the danger, the agency says.
Stay away from windows and outside walls.
_ At school, move to hallways and lie flat on the floor with headcovered.
_ In a mobile home or trailer, leave immediately.
Head for asecure shelter or lie flat on the ground.
Be wary of areas with poordrainage, however, because of the possibility of flooding from thethunderstorm.
_ At work or in public buildings, head for interior hallways onthe lowest floor, or designated shelter areas.
_ In an automobile, leave immediately.
Do not try to outrun atornado.
