Introduction:   Simply put , the question was who should becounted as a person and who, if anybody, should not.
But there'snothing simple about it.
The point at issue in Senate debate on a new immigration bill waswhether illegal aliens should be counted in the process that willreallocate House seats among states after the 1990 census.
Nobody is certain because counting illegal aliens is a hard thingto do, given the fact that they don't want to be spotted by thegovernment.
Then again, the Census Bureau maintains that notincluding them, and still coming up with an accurate 1990 populationcount, would be even more difficult.
After the 1980 census, the government estimated that there were2.57 million people in the United States illegally.
The government made no attempt tocount them out in the redistricting process; indeed, the twoprevious administrations decided that the Constitution required thatthe census cover illegal aliens along with citizens.
There is not likely to be any change in that prior to the 1990census next spring.
It does not come with instructions, so the department wouldhave to figure out how.
With 435 seats in the House, everyrepresentative gained by a state is a representative lost by another.
Kennedy,D-Mass., said it was unconstitutional, as well as unworkable.
Neither the original article nor the amendment mentionscitizenship in connection with apportionment, although the term``citizens'' is used in some other provisions.
That came later, with immigration restrictions that began in 1875.
He said it is unfair tocount illegal aliens in reapportionment.
``It just does not make anysense,'' Dole said.
``It does violate the constitutional principleof one man, one vote.''
Women couldn't vote when theConstitution and the 14th Amendment were adopted, but they alwayswere counted.
Children can't vote, but they count, too.
The amendment was adopted after the Senate voted 58 to 41 againsta move to reject it, and 56 to 43 against scuttling it asunconstitutional.
``Somebody is going to challenge it...'' he said.
End Adv PM Thurs July 20
