Introduction: THE 74-year-old man said it was "like needles or nails being stuck in" whenpolice handcuffed him behind his back as he lay face down.
Retired RomanCatholic Bishop George Lynch of New York was describing his treatment by WestHartford, Conn., police during a 1989 anti-abortion demonstration.
In mid-June, a lawsuit against the Los Angeles Police Department wassettled when police agreed to stop using a martial-arts weapon, nunchakus,while arresting anti-abortion advocates.
It is thepractice of the protesters to go limp when ordered to move but to otherwiseoffer no resistance to police.
Other scenes showpolice apparently placing fingers into the nostrils of one demonstrator andgrabbing the breast of a female protester to force compliance.
Thesettlement over police use of nunchakus in Los Angeles, like the videos andphotographs showing police using pain compliance techniques on Rescueparticipants, received little attention from the public, civil rights groupsor the press.
Some critics say the lack of attention is a sign of a doublestandard.
Police, including Assistant Chief Craig Carrucci of WestHartford, deny the claims of brutality.
"He called pain compliance "a valid tool" used "in directproportion to the amount of resistance."
Similarly, the CBS Evening News reported March 27 "onvarious aspects of police brutality" but did not include examples involvinganti-abortion activists, a producer said.
Philip Wogaman, professor of Christian social ethics atWesley Theological Seminary in Washington, D.C.believes the comparison withother kinds of protests breaks down at several points.
For instance, he said,civil rights demonstrators normally were picketing to assert their right toeat at a lunch counter or ride on a bus, not closing facilities to deny therights of others.
"I amconcerned that anti-abortion protesters are receiving selective prosecutionand selectively harsh treatment, unlike that received by other demonstratorsfor other causes," said Allen, who generally opposes abortion.
But the civil liberties group is clearly caught between conflicting rights.
The ACLU may support some of Operation Rescue's claims of police brutality,but Sobel said it also has won a $110,000 judgment in a case in which the ACLUhad obtained an injunction against the anti-abortion group.
A commission spokeswoman said its legal mandate prohibitsdealing with abortion issues.

