Introduction: It's a coincidence of cosmic proportions.
The result: From Earth both orbs look almost exactly the samesize.
"It's maybe the greatest natural occurrence one can witness," said LarryToy, a Chabot College astronomy professor. "
The phenomenon is justawe-inspiring.
); Because of variations in the moon's orbit, fewer than a third of the solareclipses are total eclipses.
Most total eclipses getlittle public attention.
They occur over water, over the poles or indifficult-to-reach terrain.
On average, any point on Earth is eclipsed justonce every 360 years.
In the United States, the opportunity has come twice in the past couple ofdecades -- along the East Coast in 1970 and across the Northwest and NorthernPlains in 1979.This Thursday the moon's shadow will be back for anotherperformance, one of the century's best.
It's unusual for several reasons.
At its peak, observers will see one of the longest-lasting eclipses thiscentury -- six minutes, 53 seconds.
Also, its 150-mile-wide path acrossHawaii, Baja California, Mexico City and four Central American capital cities"puts more people in the moon's shadow than any other eclipse in history,"says Alan Dyer, an editor of Astronomy magazine.
Finally, since the centerof the shadow will pass right across the world's largest cluster ofastronomical observatories, the audience will include several dozen solarscientists intent on getting the best view they've ever had.
But in recent years solar eclipses have declined in significancefor researchers.
At 13,800 feet, MaunaKea is the world's tallest island mountain.
The air above it is still, dry andclean, making it one of the world's choicest spots for viewing the cosmos.
And, unlike mostpeople headed for Hawaii, astronomers will be packing long underwear and downjackets in case, as sometimes happens even in July, the temperature at thesummit drops below freezing.7 observatories in useSeven of the nineobservatories atop Mauna Kea will be used Thursday morning.
(The KeckObservatory, being built by the University of California and the CaliforniaInstitute of Technology, is behind its original construction schedule and willnot be completed in time for the eclipse.

