Introduction: This has always been a land of stark contrasts and magnificent subtleties, never more so than in the aftermath of last summer's spectacular season of fire which scorched enough timber and meadow to rival Rhode Island in size.
Much Unscathed Despite infernos that whipped through the treetops like blast furnaces, most of the pristine landscape emerged unscathed, as did the elusive grizzly bears in the high country, the resilient herds of elk and bison and the famous geysers that fill the air with eerie puffs of steam and mist.
Either way, they're dead.
Others lay scattered across the ground like giant pick-up-sticks.
Down at ground level, the same scenery is a thing of beauty, not devastation, to the eyes of soil scientist Henry Shovic.
He turns a spade of blackened earth and finds rich brown soil just beneath the crust, a sign that the forest not only remains fertile but will soon be teeming with new life.
In a few weeks, meadow floors will be carpeted in a thick blanket of wildflowers.
"Did you see the green?"
asks Shovic, ecstatic. "
I'm amazed.
It's going to be a picture postcard."
But while the 1988 blazes have long since flamed out, the controversy they kindled is still smoldering.
It is sure to leave its mark on future fire and management policies not just at Yellowstone but throughout the vast system of national parks and wilderness areas.
Bob Barbee.
Arguments still rage over the impact of the fires on wildlife, the conduct of officials responsible for monitoring the blazes and the role of the media and others in creating an erroneous impression that a national treasure had somehow been reduced to cinders.
Tied to Neighbors But "parks can no longer be considered ecological and sociological islands," Agee told a conference of conservationists here over the weekend.
Some movement in that direction may already be under way.
The edict applies to all but two parks in Florida. "
And, after a sweeping review and nationwide public hearings, the agency has tentatively decided to modify -- though not flatly abandon -- the controversial fire strategy once the moratorium expires.
May Become Gun-Shy Michael Scott, regional director of the Wilderness Society, said restrictions could lead to a "systematic politicization of ecosystem management" and make officials gun-shy about letting fire burn for any reason.
"They're going to say 'we better just put out the fires,' " Scott predicted.
"There could be a chilling effect on allowing nature to take its course."
But many local politicians and residents disagree.
"Even a 5-year-old child knows if something's burning you got to stop it quick.
All that stuff about burning's good for growth is a crock.
I'll never see any of it in my lifetime."
This year, only one of the rooms has been taken so far.
The centerpiece of the campaign appears to be an effort to turn what, to some might appear a disaster, into an opportunity. "
.
.
.
We have the rare opportunity to witness wildlife regeneration on a scale rarely seen anywhere on Earth."
A new $250,000 exhibit on fire ecology is under construction, as is a series of wayside exhibits describing various fire scenes.
"It's like a big laboratory."
Another hot item: videos. "
"There was no ecological downside to the fires," Barbee said recently. "
.
.
.
The media, in my opinion, went into a frenzy.
They outdid themselves with hyperbole."
Whether coverage was fair or not, the media's impact on heightening awareness of the situation was clearly considerable.
However, the chairman of the panel, Duke University botanist Norman L. Christensen, told a congressional hearing last January that he considered the fires to be both natural and beneficial to the Yellowstone environment. "
.
.
.
Although less frequent, fires approaching the size of those in 1988 occurred in the 1700s and probably occurred at 200- to 300- year intervals through the Western mountains over the past 10,000 years."
Branches below the productive region of the crown (upper 8 to 10 feet) die and fall off as the tree grows.
Here is how reforestation process takes place after logging or a fire: Stage 1- Lodgepole pine saplings grow in stands before forming canopy (up to 40 years after a fire).
Stage 2- Closed canopy of even-aged, usually dense young trees (40 to 100 years).
Stage 3- Lodgepole pines dominate, canopy largely intact.
Some spruce and fir below (100 to 300 years.
Stage 4-Canopy quite ragged.
Undergrowth includes spruce, fir and white-bark pine (over 300 years).
