Introduction: You think it would be utter folly to lend money to a ThirdWorld nation?
This rescues them from the clutchesof loan sharks -- microloans typically charge the prevailinglocal commercial loan rate -- and lets them borrow again inhard times.
The money helps them start or expand theirbusinesses -- selling vegetables, sewing, repairing shoes,making furniture and the like -- and boosts their localeconomies.
Their repayment performance shines when compared with thatof many sovereign nations.
Though microlending has been around for years, it is nowbooming.
"Micro-enterprise lending is the hottest thing indevelopment since the Green Revolution.
Everybody does it,"says Accion International spokeswoman Gabriela Romanow.
TheGreen Revolution sent farm output surging in many poornations.
In six years, the couple took out and repaid fiveloans and built their business to 18 full-time employees.
Sometimes borrowers have to struggle against setbacks thatmight seem comical in the prosperous West.
Undaunted, the women switched to chickens and madeenough money selling eggs to branch out into tomatoes andtailoring, ultimately opening two shops, Ms. Leet says.
"When we got in touch with Accion, we wereincredulous," Mr. Btesh says.
"We couldn't believe theirfigures.
But everything they said is true.
Accion, a Cambridge, Mass.-based nonprofit internationaldevelopment group and a leader in the U.S. microloanmovement, says it plans to increase its microlending thisyear to $66.5 million from $37.8 million in 1990 and $9.8million five years ago.
It says it plans to add 64,000 newclients, up from 40,000 last year and 9,000 five years ago.
Thepayback rate is 98%.CARE, New York, perhaps the world's largest privateinternational-development group, says small economic-activitydevelopment -- primarily microlending -- is itsfastest-growing portfolio.
"We feel private enterpriseis the way to help the poor," says Mrs. Leet, who foundedTrickle Up with her husband in 1979.
The group started aprogram in China in 1989 and moved into Laos, Vietnam andNamibia last year.
She says microlending toindividuals in 20 nations is rising sharply, with more than$3 million in circulation at the moment.
Repayment rates inmost nations exceed 90%, she says.
However, most such banks were set upwith state support specifically to target the poor.
Not every charity group in the U.S. has joined themicroloan bandwagon.
AID has more than doubled itsmicro-enterprise budget, which includes microlending,training and other activities, to an estimated $114 millionthis year from $58 million in 1988.
