Gov.
By this afternoon, severe thunderstorms were crossing theNortheast.
The National Weather Service put out a tornado watch forparts of Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York,all of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and parts of Massachusetts,Vermont and New Hampshire.
In Pennsylvania, the weather service said it receivedunconfirmed reports of a tornado that turned over a car and knockeddown trees and power lines near Gettysburg.
Elsewhere:   _ In Georgia, 19 people were injured, four critically, and atleast 200 people were evacuated after a tornado strus.
C., and a tornadotoppled trees, downedpower lines and damaged 20 houses near Greenwood, S.C. No injurieswere reported in either state.
Four peoplewere injured, two seriously.
In a matter of seconds, cars were hurledthrough the air and crushed, and apartments and stores looked as ifthey had been bombed.
``It was fast,'' said Lucy Lee Rusk, whose apartment wasbattered by debris.
``It was like one big pop and that's wheneverything went.''
The National Weather Service had issued a tornado watch earlierin the day, but did not issue a more urgent tornado warning until4:39 p.m. CST, when the tornado was spotted at the municipal golfcourse.
By then, it was already tearing up the city.
She saidpolice had no firm reports of people missing.
No children in the school were killed, but about 30 youngsterswere in a kindergarten class at the building, and five werereported injured.
Most of the dead were in apartments, stores orcars.
Mayor Steve Hettinger estimated the number of homeless at 1,000and said officials were preparing a request for federal disasterassistance.
A worker at a building owned by the Madison County Jaycees said42 people were staying there early today, and described the mood ofthe survivors as ``shock, mostly, and disbelief.''
The tornado was Alabama's deadliest since a 1975 twister killed22 people in Birmingham, said Danny Cooper, state emergencymanagement director in Montgomery.
Along a highway near a destroyed apartment complex, cars wereflipped and smashed into telephone poles and crushed by trees.
Humana Hospital administrator David Miller said doctors haddifficulty reaching the hospital because of blocked roads.
``All of these heavyarcing, flashing lines that were just popping and snapping over thetop of us.
...
It was as if you were looking into an arc-welder,they were so bright.''
``There wasn't anything I could do, so I covered my head,''Lenhard said.
``I thought, `What the heck, I'm already half dead.'''
The downtown Jones Valley Elementary School, the WaterfordSquare and adjacent Queensbury apartment complexes were reduced torubble.
Kindergarteners were the only pupils left at the school by thetime the twister hit.
``Then we heard a large, loud, swirling and humming noise,'' herecalled.
``It didn't sound like a train like everybody says itdoes.
It did not sound like a train.
Itsounded more like a jet aircraft at very close range.''
Thomas Farr was driving on Interstate 85 when the tornado hit.``It was picking up cars and tossing them like toys off theinterstate,'' he said.
