Introduction:SLOVENES always had at least as much in common with their Alpine neighboursas with their Balkan partners in the former Yugoslavia.
'We have been very lucky,' says President Milan Kucan, the wily formercommunist who led Slovenia's drive for independence from the Serb- dominatedfederation.
'Slovenia's southern border with Croatia has become the border between peaceand war in Europe,' Mr Kucan declares.
Austria is insulated from the war-torn regions of Croatiaand Bosnia-Herzegovina, both once ruled by the Austrian Habs- burgs, thanksto its own 324 km-long border with Slovenia.
The railways and the motorway leading south through the capital Ljubljana tothe Slovenian port of Koper and its Italian neighbour Trieste carry freightand travellers heading to and from central Europe and the Adriatic sea.
Economists, however, are quick to point out that independence has its costs.
Its per capita GDP of around Dollars 6,000 was three times higher than thatof Serbia and five times that of Kosovo, the poorest region of the formerYugoslavia.
But it alsobenefited from the overnight stays of foreign tourists heading further southto Croatia's Dalmatian coast.
So have the transit tourists throughSlovenia.
The UN embargo on trade with Serbia means both the loss of the largest ofthe former Yugoslav markets and an end to cheap Serbian raw materials andother inputs.
These helped restrain costs and improve competitiveness inmore demanding hard currency markets.
Now Slovenia has to lower real wagesand increase productivity in order to compensate.
On the positive side of the balance sheet, however, the end of the federalstate means that Slovenia no longer has to contribute over Dollars 1bn ayear to finance the bloated Yugoslav army or see its hard currency deposits'frozen' by the National Bank of Yugoslavia, as happened beforeindependence.
The first of these is the border itself, which is disputed in parts.
Thesecond issue contains Croatia's share of the running costs of the Krskonuclear plant on Slovenian territory.
The thirdoutstanding issue concerns compensation for the assets of Ljubljanska Bankain Croatia.
Of course thepeople who are dying do not care how it is defined.
It is atragedy that Bosnia's elected leader has now been reduced by theinternational com- munity to merely one of sev- eral ethnic leaders,' headds.
The border with Croatia is now in effect sealed against further immigationafter 70,000 refugees, equivalent to 3.5 per cent of the local population,were taken in.
Refugees are housed and cared for by local authorities aroundthe country, often in former Yugoslav army barracks, at an annual cost ofaround Dollars 250m.
Many are expected to stay even after the war ends.
At the core of the government is an alliance between the Liberal Democrats,headed by Mr Drnovsek, which emerged as the largest single party with 25 percent of seats in parliament, and the Christian Democrats led by Mr LojzePeterle, the foreign minister.
But the coalition also includes the fourparty 'associated list', made up principally of reformed communists.
Both are needed to reverse the rise inunemployment and build on the structural reforms to the banking system andprivatisation which are currently under way.
The next four years will be crucial.
By the end of the century it wants to be eligible forfull membership of an enlarged European Community.
