If confirmed, the 43-year-oldjudge for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia would followMarshall as the second black to ascend to the court.
But Thomas, who has risen in Republican ranks as an advocate of bootstrapconservatism, would present a striking change from Marshall, a civil-rightspioneer and an anchor of the court's declining liberal faction.
Now the question is to what extentThomas would add weight to the court's new majority that appears willing todismantle important parts of the legacy that Marshall helped to build.
However, in other respects, this nominationis very much a wild card both for conservatives who jumped instantly toembrace it and for liberals whose responses ranged from cautious to hostile.
Those views may well remain unknown through a confirmation processthat may be contentious but that in the end is not likely to derail thenomination.
Studied for priesthoodThomas attended Roman Catholicschools through college and studied for the priesthood.
His position onaffirmative action is probably sufficient to shift the court's direction sincethe court remains closely divided.
"My opposition to preferences andquotas not only is a constitutional, legal opposition, it has been a moral,ethical opposition," he said five years ago at a conference sponsored by theAnti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
In its most recentaffirmative-action decision, a year ago, the court split 5-4 in upholding aFederal Communications Commission policy that gives preference to blacks andmembers of other minorities in acquiring some radio and television licenses.
Justice William Brennan wrote that decision a few weeks before he retiredfrom the court.
Marshall joined it.
The views of Justice David Souter,Brennan's successor, remain largely unknown.
Some Democratic senators said at the time and againMonday that their votes to confirm him for the appeals court should not betaken as endorsements for the Supreme Court.
Abortion faction speaks out"The Souter model of silence and evasion that wesaw last year is absolutely unacceptable," said Kate Michelman, executivedirector of the National Abortion Rights Action League.
"I'm through reading tea leaves and voting in thedark," he said.
But the Judiciary Committee includes some of the mostconservative Democrats in the Senate as well several combative Republicanconservatives.
Rights groups cautiousCivil rightsgroups took a cautious tone Monday, essentially noting "concerns" and sayingthey would study the record.
At his side stood a black manwho was 5 years old when Marshall won his Supreme Court argument in Brown vs.the Board of Education and who was a college freshman when Marshall joined theSupreme Court.
That was a generation ago, when the court was stillrewriting the ground rules by which Americans were to live their lives.
CLARENCE THOMAS; Born: June 23,1948, in Pinpoint, Ga. Education: B.A.
from Holy Cross College, 1971; J.D.from Yale Law School, 1974.Career:; 1974-'77: assistant attorneygeneral, state of Missouri; 1977-'79: attorney, Monsanto Co.1979-'81: legislative assistant to Sen. John Danforth, R-Mo.1981-'82:assistant secretary for civil rights, Education Department; 1982-'90:chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; 1990-: U.S.Circuit Court of Appeals for District of Columbia; Source: Who's Who AmongBlack Americans; WHAT'S NEXT?Now that President Bush has nominated ClarenceThomas to the Supreme Court , the next step is up to the Senate.
TheSenate Judiciary Committee is expected to begin confirmation hearings inSeptember, after the August recess.
