Witnesses who visited the site said there were no survivors.
Ackerman said that the plane appeared to have hit "nose first, right into the rocks; its two wings sheared off, its engines melted, its fuselage gone."
Wreckage Examined Ackerman said that military paratroopers lowered themselves from his helicopter on ropes to examine the wreckage. "
They told us everyone had died instantaneously," Ackerman said.
7 Ethiopians Killed Also on board were Debebe Agonofer, an Ethiopian agricultural economist with the AID mission, and six other Ethiopians, including the plane's crew of three.
The search on Sunday was hampered again by thunderstorms, poor visibility and other conditions that characterized many of the previous days of search.
"The terrain was fairly rugged and the weather conditions were bad getting there," said Capt.
Clair M. Gilk, commander of one of the two helicopters that were the first to spot the wreckage.
Recovery Planned for Today Air Force personnel were assigned to remain near the site Sunday night to keep it secure.
Because of the site's inaccessibility, it could take at least two days to recover all of the bodies, according to Maj. Gen. James F. Record, who came here from Washington to oversee the search effort.
Stan Bloyer, said that the remains of the Americans will probably be returned to the United States through Torrejon Air Base near Madrid, where the American armed forces maintains full mortuary facilities.
Dellums to Accompany Bodies Dellums, House Majority Whip William H. Gray III (D-Pa.) and Republican Reps. Bill Emerson of Missouri and Jack Fields of Texas plan to fly to Addis Ababa to accompany the bodies back to the United States.
Discovery of the crash site came at about 1:15 p.m. local time Sunday.
There, the crew came upon a Roman Catholic missionary who told them that he had heard reports from local villagers that a plane had been heard nearby last week.
Presently, the crew found an Ethiopian surveyor who said he could guide them to an area near where the plane had been heard.
The surveyor was taken aboard, crew members said, but on their way toward their destination they spotted the crash site.
The location was described as very steep, with the plane resting on land that was pitched at an angle of about 60 degrees. '
Before the plane reached safety, it ran into the mountainside.
Rep. Alan Wheat (D-Mo.
), who with Ackerman had been flying with search crews for the last two days, said he telephoned House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) from Addis Ababa soon after the discovery was made.
He said that Foley was "heartbroken" at the news.
The crash site was described by U.S. authorities as being about 20 nautical miles due east of the town of Gambela and 230 nautical miles west-southwest of Addis Ababa.
It appeared to be near the village of Bure.
However, Sunday was the first day that helicopters flew over the area to make visual inspections.
The discovery, and indications that the passengers had died instantly, brought an end to charges that the American military response to the emergency was inadequate and tardy.
Our hearts go out to (his widow) and to the families and friends of the congressional staff members, State Department, Agency for International Development and Ethiopian officials who joined Mickey on his important mission and who died with him trying to carry it out."
Secretary of State James A. Baker III praised the congressman as "an outstanding statesman and humanitarian who died serving his country."
Bush offered U.S. help to the Ethiopian government for its investigation into the crash of the plane.
Mrs. Leland is pregnant with the couple's second child.
Leland had no significant opposition for his congressional seat since he was first elected, winning his most recent election with 96% of the vote.

