The ``Chunnel'' between Britain and France is half-dug andscheduled to open on time in three years.
The project also has raised increasing hostility among manyBritons, who fear it will provide an easy conduit for ills from thecontinent ranging from terrorism to rabid animals.
``We will have the money to finish the project,'' says AlastairMorton, British deputy chairman of Eurotunnel, the privately ownedAnglo-French company overseeing the work.
But the project's success hinges on much more than justfinishing the undug part.
Napoleon wanted to build it butBritain warned him off.
The Chunnel project also has been marred by eight accidentaldeaths on the site.
The British public demonstrates little enthusiasm for theChunnel.
Random samplings elicit fears that it will import rabies,terrorists, invading armies.
Giant boring machines are digging three tunnels toward eachother from Folkestone, England and Calais, France, with the firstunderground meeting expected in November in the service tunnelbetween the rail tunnels.
As of mid-June, workers had dug 53.2of the total 91.9 miles.
Chunnel trains will carry passengers, cars and freight betweenLondon and Paris in about three hours, roughly the same time as aflight including ground travel, and at least twice as fast as acar-ferry journey.
The Civil Aviation Authority says the tunnel shoulddivert 5 million out of 53 million air passengers annually.
That step could clear the way for abank syndicate's approval of additional credit Eurotunnel hasrequested, from $8.6 billion to $12 billion.
The company mostrecently estimated it would cost $13.1 billion to complete, vs.$8.3 billion forecast initially.
``History dictates that that will not be the last figure wehear.
He expected the extra financing to comethrough.
``It's one of these situations where the more money you put in,the more you have to spend or else you're walking away frombillions of pounds,'' Hannah said.
But stockholders haven'rofit before thet fared badly: The shares, firsttradedin November 1987 at about $6, have traded recently at $8.55.
Themore urgent worries for Eurotunnel have been costs, creditors andcontractor feuds.
The problems led to Eurotunnel's second management shakeup since1987.
The French government, on the contrary, is spending roughly $2.8billion building 210 miles of rail from Paris to the tunnel, with abranch to Brussels, where the EC is headquartered.
Trains capableof 190 mph will link the tunnel's freight and passengers to anotherplanned high-speed system.
One reason the French are enthusiastic is that the tunnelsurfaces in one of the most depressed areas of France.
On the other hand, residents of Kent, in England's rural andprosperous Southeast, have campaigned strenuously against havinghigh-speed trains screaming through their back yards.
