"Froggy bashing" is nothing new here, though it does seemto have gained momentum.
The chalk marl under the Channel may beperfectly pliable; the spirit of gloom and resentment aboutthe tunnel (though the disgruntled always are noisier thanthe positive or the indifferent) may prove more intractable.
Nevertheless, after at least 20 false starts since 1802,the project to join England to "Europe" is irreversibly underway.
Later, I get close to the toy chest, the construction campin the shadow of Shakespeare Cliff, where nearly 1,000 ofthem live. "
Inside the tunnel it is cold and wet and dark, but mainlyit's big.
The site manager gives us the bigfigures.
The total length of each tunnel will be 32 miles, 25of which will be under the sea.
Seven thousand British and4,000 French workers, on eight- to 12-hour shifts, havecompleted more than half of the job.
Of the three tunnels --two big ones for trains and another for service -- thesmallest is the most advanced: They've bored more than 27miles.
The breakthrough is expected by November.
The boring machines are fantastic: guided by satellite,gyroscope, computer and laser, these monsters, equipped withCuisinart-style blades more than 16 feet wide, can chop andshred chalk at about 15 feet an hour, or 650-1,000 feet aweek.
The originalforecast for the whole project was $8.5 billion; to thechagrin of the 206 banks involved, it now has reached $13.3billion and many people estimate tunnel costs of $17.5billion before we see the light at the end.
Not quite.
All leaders like to leave their monuments.
Many observers believe that, by doing nothing to improvethe nation's creaking rail system, Britain will lose out onthe full benefits of the Chunnel.
And travelers from France will haveto adjust, perhaps by chewing gum rapidly, when they switchfrom the "grande vitesse" of the Chemins de Fer Francais tothe homely milk route of British Rail, and sit out an extrahalf-hour until arrival at Waterloo.
This, though, is not amatter of time or money, it's "an attitude problem."
Despite the gift packs of French and English wine (moreunfavorable comparisons) on sale just beneath the "I dig thetunnel" stickers at the Eurotunnel Exhibition Centre, mostBritons seem to share, or will have to learn to live inregretful memory of, Gladstone's view that England should be"happy that the wise dispensation of Providence has cut heroff by that streak of silver sea .
.
.
partly from dangers,absolutely from the temptations which attend upon the localneighbourhood of the Continental nations.
"
