Introduction:Consuelo wishes she could share her First Communion this year with Abuelita.
She misses her grandmother very much.
Abuelita was not very old -- just 62 -- but there was not much the doctors could do to save her life.
Consuelo and Abuelita aren't actual people, but their story nevertheless is played over and over again among the more than 3 million Latinos in the Los Angeles metropolitan area, health officials say.
The reason is diabetes, a silent killer that afflicts one in eight Latino adults.
That is why the American Diabetes Assn.
and other health education groups in the Los Angeles area and California have begun a major push to educate Latinos about diabetes.
The effort is being aided by interested physicians and by drug companies, which make insulin and other drugs used for diabetes that can't be controlled by changes in eating habits.
Like heart disease, the adult-onset diabetes most common among Latinos is a condition that can be largely prevented with proper diet and exercise, doctors say.
Being 20% or more overweight is one of the major diabetes risk factors.
"We need to get into the communities and start teaching the kids and the adolescents and the parents to make some changes in their habits," said Dr. Jaime Davidson, a Dallas physician who has spearheaded the diabetes association's Latino education efforts. "
Many people think that when Latinos come here (to the United States) they gain weight because they continue to eat the way they ate at home.
But in fact, they change," Davidson said.
"What happens is, fast foods are readily available .
.
.
and they are higher in fat and calories.
"That ends in having more obesity.
sponsored a diabetes health fair at Olvera Street Plaza on Aug. 26.
Diabetes is a defect in the body's system for using sugar in the blood.
It results from the body's failure to make insulin or, some studies indicate, from its inability to use insulin that is available.
Genetically controlled defects in the body's insulin system are also thought to exist both for them and Latinos.
Diabetes that begins in childhood requires daily insulin injections.
Most commonly in Latinos, however, diabetes takes the form called Type II, which first appears in adulthood and often can be controlled with proper diet and exercise.
The disease tends to show up in the late 20s and early 30s among Latinos, a decade earlier than it does in Anglos, Davidson said.
Latinos, who often have less access to regular health care than Anglos, are more likely to go undiagnosed, Matkin said.
The new educational efforts to change that picture are necessary, not only because they help individuals stay healthy but also because the nation's health care funding crisis will only get worse if the problem is not reduced, Davidson said.
"We are facing a problem that is going to grow, maybe at epidemic proportions," Davidson said.
Recent immigrants and even some longtime U.S. residents are not likely to want to switch completely away from a diet reliant on beans, tortillas and other carbohydrates, Montoro noted, but modifications can be made easily.
Other barriers to Latinos getting care for diabetes are more subtle, doctors interested in the issue say.
Davidson said he is confident that Latinos will respond to education efforts on diabetes.
"I think that if we give them the opportunity and the tools that Latinos are no different than anybody else," Davidson said.
"We need to give them the opportunity to enter the health care system, and we need to give them the opportunity to learn that diabetes is the biggest health care issue that they are going to face into the year 2000."
The booklet, written in both English and Spanish, is available for $5.76 from the California Dietetic Assn., Box 3506, Santa Monica, CA 90403.
For brochures or more information on diabetes, call American Diabetes Assn.
, (800) 828-8293; (213) 381-3639; or (714) 662-7940.
According to the American Diabetes Assn.
, in the United States every year: * 150,000 people die of diabetes and its complications * 5,000 people go blind because of diabetes * 10% of all cases of kidney disease necessitating dialysis were caused by diabetes * 45% of all non-traumatic amputations of the leg and foot were caused by diabetes * Heart disease is 2 to 4 times more likely in people with diabetes 
