Introduction: In the late 1970s, poor farmers living in communities surrounding this small town began replacing their fields of cacao and coffee with coca to meet the growing U.S. demand for cocaine.
Development workers, farmers and priests in the area say that the rebels have steadily streamed into the Upper Huallaga, a vast stretch of jungle northeast of Lima, and the biggest coca-growing zone in the world.
This effort focuses on interdicting drug trafficking and eradicating coca plants.
And this is something Peruvian and U.S. officials apparently would rather avoid.
During this period, the army had virtual dictatorial control over all military and nonmilitary operations in the region.
Government officials from the anti-drug police (UMOPAR) and the coca-eradication unit (CORAH) sent into the region to wipe out drug production were often confined to their barracks by the army; they simply were not allowed to carry on with their work.
Anti-drug police, Upper Huallaga residents and Interior Ministry officials report that army officers received hundreds of thousands of dollars in payoffs from drug lords for their help in keeping anti-drug officials at bay.
"It's better for the 'narcos' when the army is here," says one UMOPAR officer.
Not only did it lose the power of authority in the region, but the number of troops in the Upper Huallaga Valley was dramatically reduced.
With the army impediment gone, the anti-drug campaign set about pushing traffickers out of Tingo Maria, their former headquarters, eliminating coca growing in the immediate vicinity of the town.
But the narcos have now entrenched themselves in the towns of Tocache and Uchiza, where the police have repeatedly been blocked from entering by armed residents.
At the same time, farmers are now planting coca in rugged parts of the jungle, far from CORAH's sweep.
The rebels then process the leaves into coca paste and sell the paste to international traffickers -- usually Colombians -- for weapons and money, local sources say.
But residents insist that the rebels operate as a de facto government in the zone, even in Aucayacu and Tulumayo, where the police and army have outposts.
An important guerrilla activity is organizing community self-defense groups against the hated police.
In early January, the rebels were apparently behind a strike protesting the anti-drug program.
For three days they shut down the 50-mile road from Tingo Maria to Rio Uchiza -- the only continuous, paved road in the valley.
The relationship between the Shining Path and the people of the valley is not entirely cordial.
The rebels are also believed responsible for the murders of four homosexual men last November in Aucayacu.
On March 13 in El Triumfo, a small community near Aucayacu, they executed a 23-year-old man who spoke out against a guerrilla-organized activity. "
That really shook up the 80 families in the community," says Enrique Pena, a parish priest who can no longer enter the guerrilla-controlled area.

