Introduction:IT IS ironic that there is an unprecedented, greedy rush for diamonds byminers in Angola and Canada precisely at a time when the diamond business isin turmoil and questions are inevitably being asked about the ability of theworld's most successful cartel to keep its tight grip on the market.
In Canada's Northwest Territories, the discovery of 81 small diamonds, someof gem quality, has sparked the biggest rush to stake mining claims in thehistory of the North American industry.
More than Dollars 1m-worth of gem diamonds a day arebeing smuggled out of that country for sale in Antwerp.
This rise of illegal mining,particularly in the Cuango region, which produces 80 per cent of Angola'sdiamonds and some of its highest-quality gem stones, started in May, 1991,after the peace accord which allowed freedom of movement for the first timein 16 years.
The onset of the dry seasonand the fall in river levels from the end of May this year has encouragedwhat De Beers, the South African group that dominates the world diamondbusiness, describes as 'a sudden and unprecedented explosion in the supplyof illicit Angolan diamonds reaching the market'.Even though there are so many diggers at work, questions are being askedabout whether there might be more to this 'explosion.'
IsEndiama, Angola's state-owned diamond company, implicated in some way?
it forgranted that the diamond cartel will be able to continue to keep prices upand make all their efforts worthwhile.
But the cartel has ensured that rough (uncut) diamond prices have risensteadily since the 1930s - even when in the depths of the 1981-86 recessionthe price of a top-quality, one carat gem diamond slumped in the retailmarket from Dollars 60,000 to Dollars 10,000.The cartel is organised by De Beers' London-based Central SellingOrganisation, which markets about 80 per cent of the world's rough diamonds.
Apart from De Beers' own production from Namibia and South Africa, the CSOhandles rough gem diamonds from Angola, Australia, Botswana, Russia,Tanzania and Zaire.
The CSO has been mopping up as many of the smuggled Angolan diamonds aspossible to stop havoc being created in a business already sufferingseverely from soggy demand in the US and Japan, the two biggest markets,which share about two-thirds of demand between them.
De Beers says that, because times are tough.
It has also toldthe producers to cut deliveries by 25 per cent - something the CSO contractspermit at times of stress.
De Beers releases a controlled stream of rough diamonds to the marketthrough 'sights' offered by the CSO ten times a year to about 160 selectedbuyers.
They are offered boxes of diamonds, each worth between Dollars500,000 and Dollars 25m.
The contents are judged by the CSO to balance therequirements of the buyers with market demand.
Mr Harry Oppenheimer, whose family effectively controls both De Beers andits sister group, the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa, wasdefending the cartel again last week at the formal opening of the R1.1bnVenetia diamond mine in the Transvaal.
The fact is that the level of world diamond production, whichis carried on in many countries, cannot be controlled.
Diamond prices cannotbe fixed artificially but have to be set at a level which allows productionand consumption to be equated.'What the CSO for many years has done successfully, is to operate a bufferpool, stocking diamonds in bad times and liquidating its stocks when demandis in excess of the level of supply.
In this way it has been able topreserve an essential degree of stability in the price of this ultimateluxury of gem diamonds, to the common advantage of producers, processors andconsumers of this unique natural product.'All very altruistic.
But De Beers makes huge profits from its diamondbusiness - a record Dollars 1.24bn in 1990 and more than Dollars 1bn lastyear.
The cartel nearly lost control of the market in the early 1980s.
Merchants, particularly in Israel, stockpiled diamonds on borrowed money asa hedge against inflation and when recession hit they had to dump diamondsfaster than the Central Selling Organisation could mop them up.
The CSO'sdiamond stocks, worth under Dollars 1bn in 1980 rose to Dollars 1.9bn by1984.
Hundreds of diamond investment trusts and traders were bankrupted atthat time and Australia and Zaire challenged De Beers' near-monopoly.
De Beers has taken good care that merchant stocks have never again beenbuilt for speculative reasons, frequently going to the banks, the potentialfinanciers of stockpiling operations, to 'educate' them about the way thediamond market works.
Diamond sales in value terms jumped by 20 per centin 1987 and another 37 per cent the following year.
It must be open to question whether another Japan can be found to lift thediamond market as the present recession ends.
But in the meantime Mr Julian Ogilvie Thompson, De Beers' chairman, insiststhat the CSO's control of the diamond market is not slipping.'By mopping up Angolan supplies we can say that more of the world's roughdiamonds are passing through the CSO than ever before,' he says.
Byapplying the deferred purchases clauses in our contracts with producers weare applying the right medicine to ensure that demand matches supply andthat the diamond market will remain stable'.The future of De Beers' diamond operations in Namibia were discussed withthe government there yesterday.
ROUGH DIAMOND PRODUCTION               (MILLION CARATS)