Introduction:   People caught by Hurricane Hugo lastyear might disagree, but forecasters here say the deadly storm mayhave had a positive side effect _
And one forecaster says hurricane seasons may be getting worse.
Hugo, which caused an unprecedented $10 billion in damage,killed 28 people in the Lesser Antilles islands and an additional29 in South Carolina.
But it would have been much more deadly if it had hit almostanywhere else, says Bob Sheets, director of the National HurricaneCenter.
At the advent of the Atlantic hurricane season, which runs fromJune 1 to Nov. 30, Sheets and other hurricane experts are usingHugo's example to get the attention of complacent coastal residentswho've never experienced such fury.
``We'll take advantage of the fact that there was a Hugo lastyear and raise people's awareness,'' said Sheets.
Early warnings about Hugo last September allowed 350,000 peopleto evacuate safely, and in South Carolina the worst of thehurricane struck the Francis Marion National Forest betweenCharleston and Myrtle Beach, Sheets said.
If Hugo had struck a major coastal population center, thedestruction would have been greater than most Americans have everseen, according to computer simulations known as SLOSH models, forSea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes.
``The population density in South Carolina is a lot differentfrom the Florida coast, New Jersey or Galveston, Texas,'' Sheetssaid.
Hugo was the worst hurricane to strike the southeastern U.S.coast since Betsy hit the Florida Keys in 1965, killing 74 beforeit went on to Missisippi and Louisiana.
Since then, the populationof areas such as south Florida has ballooned and most residentshave never directly experienced a hurricane.
According to one of the nation's leading hurricane experts, Hugomay have been the first in a new era of killer storms.
``But then he looked atthe rainfall over Africa, and found an amazing correlation betweenrainfall there and hurricane activity over Florida.''
Gray realized the 30-year drought in Africa's Sahel regioncorresponds almost exactly to the years when no major hurricaneshave struck the southeastern coast.
Sheets said.
Tropical storms have been recorded in the Atlantic in everymonth except April, but are rare outside the June 1 to Nov. 30season.
The names for Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms this yearare: