Introduction:THERE are growing signs that Hurricane Andrew, unwelcome as it was for thedevastated inhabitants of Florida and Louisiana, may in the end do no harmto the re-election campaign of President George Bush.
After a faltering and heavily criticised initial response to the disaster,both the president and his administration seem finally to be gettingassistance to those rendered homeless and to businesses and farms that havebeen destroyed.
In the process, Mr Bush has been able to call on the power of incumbency,the one asset denied his presidential rival, Mr Bill Clinton, who is tovisit Florida today.
This was brought home graphically by the president'sannouncement that Homestead Air Force base in Florida - a major localemployer virtually destroyed by Andrew  - would be rebuilt.
As if to underline the political benefit to the president, a Harris pollconducted from August 26 to September 1 yesterday showed Mr Bush with 45 percent support - behind Mr Clinton by just five points - reflecting a closerrace than other recent surveys.
With Mr Bush constantly in the headlines, Mr Clinton has been left on thesidelines, able to do little more than offer sympathy and sotto vocecriticism of the president's initial stumbling.
First responses were certainly found wanting, specifically in theperformance of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) set up byPresident Carter in 1979 to handle disasters such as Andrew.
Contrary to its brief, but confirming a prescient recent report bya House committee that Mr Stickney was 'uninterested in substantiveprogrammes', FEMA was caught completely unprepared by Andrew, resulting inunseemly disputes between state and federal authorities over who did what inbringing relief.
However, the arrival in Florida of the military and the assignment ofspecial responsibilities to Mr Andrew Card, the young and telegenictransportation secretary, is making a difference.
It is also Mr Baker who is making the mostof presidential powers to dispense largesse.
US insurers expect to pay out around Dollars 500m in claims as a result ofdamage caused by Hurricane Andrew in Louisiana, the American InsuranceServices Group said yesterday, Nikki Tait reports.