Introduction:US CITIES along the Gulf of Mexico from Alabama to eastern Texas were onstorm watch last night as Hurricane Andrew headed west after sweeping acrosssouthern Florida, causing at least eight deaths and severe property damage.
That compares with the Dollars 4bn-Dollars 6n (Pounds2.1bn-Pounds 3.1bn) of insurance industry losses caused by the last big UShurricane, Hugo, which hit South Carolina in 1989.The brunt of the losses are likely to be concentrated among US insurers,industry analysts said yesterday.
Mr George Lloyd-Roberts, chairman of Lloyd's Underwriters' Non-MarineAssociation, said that, unless damage claims exceeded Pounds 3bn, theLloyd's insurance market would feel little impact.
Mr Roger Hill, insurance analyst at Warburg Securities, said he estimatedthat mainline UK insurers faced no more than Pounds 75m in damage claims sofar.'At the moment we are relaxed about it,' he said.
Royal Insurance estimated the company's losses at no more than Pounds 20m.
However, Hurricane Andrew gathered fresh strength as it moved across theGulf of Mexico and there was concern last night that it might head towardsNew Orleans, which is especially low lying and could suffer severe flooddamage.
Scientists said the storm could make landfall anywhere between the Alabamaport of Mobile and the Louisiana-Texas border, probably tomorrow night orearly Thursday.
It could threaten the large concentration of offshore oil productionfacilities in the Gulf of Mexico.
A substantial part of America's oil refining industry is concentrated on theGulf coast, in Louisiana and Texas, and officials there were reviewingemergency plans to curtail or shut down plant operations.
Andrew, the first Caribbean hurricane of the season, hit the eastern coastof Florida early yesterday, gusting up to 165mph.
A million people had been ordered to flee their homes in southern Florida asthe hurricane moved in from the Bahamas on Sunday.
The Florida Power andLight company said that about 1.2m of its customers, or 32 per cent, werewithout power.