Third World debtors had to pay $50.1 billion more to service their debts to the United States and other creditors last year than they received in new loans -- a major drain on their already cash-strapped economies -- the World Bank reported Sunday.
The bank also reported that, despite the relatively buoyant economic growth in most industrial countries, developing countries turned in a decidedly mixed performance, ranging from a mini-boom in Southeast Asian economies to further impoverishment in Africa.
The bank said that it plans to increase its own commitments for new loans to Third World countries to about $16.4 billion in the current fiscal year, up from $14.8 billion in fiscal 1988.
The figures on the cash drain showed that these "net resource transfers," as the bank parlance terms them, are mushrooming rapidly -- a measure of the mounting strain that the global debt burden is placing on Third World economies.
A bank spokesman said that part of the reason that the figure is so bloated is that some countries, such as cash-rich South Korea, are paying off their debts early.
And the new U.S. plan to help countries reduce their debts is expected to trim the total some.
The total debt burden of Third World countries currently is estimated at about $993 billion.
The debt service for this total -- that is, the payments to cover interest and principal -- amounts to about $143 billion a year.
In general, however, it said that countries whose governments follow sensible economic policies, such as in East Asia, have attracted heavy new investment and have performed well.
The bank said the continuing deterioration in the debt situation underscores the need for further efforts by the industrial countries to help Third World governments pare back their debt -- a major aim of the U.S. plan offered by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F.
However, efforts under the Brady plan are going relatively slowly, and World Bank officials cautioned that the results may not show up for at least two or three more years.
The net cash drain from the debtor countries to the richer ones began in 1984.
Until then, the richer countries had provided more in new loans to Third World nations than those countries paid back.
World Bank officials said the outflows are likely to prompt the institution to intensify its emphasis on programs that are designed to alleviate poverty, not just speed development.