At the end of the chase the officer takes his baton and brutallyhits the suspect on the back eight to 10 times, then kicks him in the face.
The suspect, unconscious, is taken to Valley Medical Center where he is foundto have a dislocated shoulder, a concussion, and numerous cuts, bruises andcontusions.
This was a real case involving a Santa Clara County police agency.
The offending officer's police report indicatedthat the suspect's injuries were due to a fall from his bike and that heappeared unconscious, although he had also struggled against beinghandcuffed.
There is no mention of police brutality.
One sergeant reported that the suspect kepttrying to move around and had to be told to remain lying down.
Another officerreported that the only verbal abuse was by the suspect toward officers.
The suspect subsequently complained of brutality.
But four citizens called to complain that they had witnessedthe arrest and that the suspect not only was not struggling but also had beenbrutally beaten.
According to the witnesses, the officer taunted thesuspect, knelt on the suspect's stomach, beat him numerous times with his cluband kicked him in his face.
The witnesses also said:The suspect at notime resisted.
What if there had notbeen four citizens who observed the brutal beating of my client?One ofthe problems in monitoring police brutality is that almost all victims ofpolice abuse have themselves committed some kind of law violation.
San Jose Police ChiefJoseph MacNamara recently referred to the Los Angeles incident as "disgustingbrutality" and pointed out that the disturbing aspect was the failure ofleadership and the code of silence.
Unfortunately, MacNamara also believes that San Jose does not need a citizens'review board.
State privacy laws combined with investigation and reporting procedures keepbrutality complaints sealed.
Those government employees who are giventhe right and the power to use force against citizens should be the mostaccountable.
As MacNamara points out, police are public servants.
Monitoring police brutality is further complicated by the fact
thatlocal communities leave it to the police departments to investigate citizencomplaints.
Complaints of police brutality should be handled inan open process that is neutral and thorough.
The attitude of the public willdetermine the effectiveness of the police discipline system.
I agree withCouncilwoman Blanca Alvarado's suggestion and the San Jose City Council'sdecision to create a system where a city official will receive and trackcitizen complaints about the police.
I would further recommend that localcommunities establish citizen review boards.
Police accountabilityincludes the right of the public to review records of investigations ofcomplaints.