Some of this year's drought in the Midwest mayhave been caused by ocean temperature abnormalities near the equatorin the Pacific Ocean, according to a new computer study reportedThursday.
Such droughts could be anticipated if the temperatureabnormalities turn out to be predictable, one of the authors said inthe report appearing in Friday's issue of Science magazine.
Arkin of the Climate Analysis Center of the NationalOceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Camp Springs, Md. They noted that when asked what caused the drought that hit muchof North America in 1988, meteorologists often reply ``the jetstream was displaced northward of its usual position so that storms,which tend to track along the path of the jet stream, were similarlydisplaced northward.''
Their proposed answer focuses on the development in April, Mayand June of drought in the Midwest, where several states recordedless rain than at any time since 1895.
By July the weather patternthey studied was breaking up, and continuing dryness in the studyarea and elsewhere probably had other causes, Arkin said.
But during the April-June period there were alternating high andlow pressure centers across much of the northern half of the WesternHemisphere:
A high-pressure center north of Hawaii, a low in theGulf of Alaska, a high in central Canada extending down into thenorthern Great Plains states and a low on the East Coast.
At the same time, a bit to the north of this band, surfacetemperatures ranged up to 0.9 degrees above normal.
The global atmosphere is so complicated that repeated running ofa more detailed computer model would be needed to show that theseabnormal temperatures are likely to be associated with drought, hesaid.
If the model holds up, the work will be the first demonstrationof tropical sea surface temperatures affecting weather outside thetropics in the summer, Arkin said.
The authors took note of computer models predicting increasedfrequency of drought with the buildup of the ``greenhouse effect''global warming caused by accumulation of gases like carbon dioxidein the atmosphere.