Introduction:Senate Democrats promised today to scrutinize Supreme Court nominee ClarenceThomas' views on abortion and other divisive issues.
But Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, said the Senate Judiciary Committee, inconfirming four justices without learning how they felt about abortion, has"given them a free ride" and should be tougher in ferreting out Thomas'views."The failure to give an answer may cause me and others to beunwilling to vote for his confirmation," Metzenbaum said on "CBS ThisMorning."Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., noted that Metzenbaum did not pressJustice David Souter during confirmation hearings about his position onabortion.
"I do not think it is appropriate to ask a nominee the ultimatequestion as to how he is going to decide a specific case," Specter said."I will not support yet another Reagan-Bush Supreme Court nominee who remainssilent on a woman's right to choose, and then ascends to the court to weakenthat right," said Metzenbaum, the only member of the Judiciary Committee whovoted against Thomas' nomination to the Circuit Court of Appeals to theDistrict of Columbia.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said on NBC's "Today" showthat "literally nobody nominated for the Supreme Court should give his or herviews with regard to cases that might come up in the future."But Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., said "in the past few months alone the Supreme Court isthrowing out past decisions, and I think it is legitimate to ask Judge Thomas,what do you think of settled law, like Roe vs.
Wade (legitimatizing abortion),what do you think of a woman's right to privacy, free speech issues, issues offreedom of religion."Civil rights groups have opposed Thomas on groundshe was insensitive to the concerns of minorities and the elderly as chairmanof the federal Equal Employment Opportunities Commission in the 1980s."The fact that he is an African-American should not be a basis for avoidingvery careful scrutiny of his civil rights record," said Julius L.
Anunabashed conservative, he would succeed the court's leading liberal -- andfirst and only black justice.
Bush rejected suggestions that he choseThomas because he wanted to keep a black in that seat."I kept my word tothe American people and to the Senate by picking the best man for the job onthe merits.
Potential opponents of the nominee promised in their statements to ignoreThomas' race when they examine his record."The background of JudgeClarence Thomas is less important than his views and what they mean toprotecting our constitutional rights," said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill. Whenhead of the EEOC during the Reagan administration
, Thomas "seemed to go out ofhis way to find ways to weaken some of the basic civil rights protections,"said Simon, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
turned thestatutes on their heads by requiring discrimination in the form of hiring andpromotion quotas, so-called goals and timetables."In a 1987 article forthe Yale Law &amp; Policy Review he referred to affirmative action as "socialengineering.""I don't want my vote to contribute to an increasingly largeand conservative anti-choice majority on the Supreme Court," said Sen. AlanCranston, D-Calif.
Thomas said he looked forward to the confirmationprocess "and to be an example to those who are where I was, and to show themthat, indeed, there is hope."Thomas declined to answer questions abouthis legal views until his hearings.
; WHAT'S NEXT?Now that President Bush hasnominated Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, the next step is up to theSenate.
The Senate Judiciary Committee is expected to begin confirmationhearings in September, after the August recess.
If confirmed promptly, Thomas could be on the Supreme Court by the timeit begins hearing cases in October.;CLARENCE THOMAS; Born: June 23, 1948, in Pinpoint, Ga. Education: B.A. fromHoly Cross College, 1971; J.D. from Yale Law School, 1974.Career:; 1974-'77: assistant attorney general, state of Missouri; 1977-'79:attorney, Monsanto Co.1979-'81: legislative assistant to Sen. JohnDanforth, R-Mo.1981-'82: assistant secretary for civil rights,Education Department;