THE MAN President Bill Clinton has chosen to head the task force to help gethis free trade pact with Canada and Mexico ratified may lack experience ininternational trade arenas.
But he comes to Washington well prepared for thekind of back-room political arm-twisting that will be required to persuade adivided Congress to pass it.
Unlike his hot-tempered and very public brother,45-year-old Bill Daley is a smooth-talking behind-the-scenes operator withimportant connections in Washington and long-standing ties with organisedlabour.
Mr Daley accepted the Nafta position after being passed over for a cabinetposition and turning down an offer to be Mr Clinton's chief negotiator atthe General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva.
Most recently, he arranged a posh Chicago dinnerfor the president that raised Dollars 1m (Pounds 670,000).However, Mr Daley's appointment to chair the White House's task force on theNorth America Free Trade Agreement is not a cosy political payoff.
Mr Clinton himself reserved his support for the deal, negotiated underGeorge Bush's administration, until side agreements dealing withenvironmental and labour issues were reached last month.
Mr Daley was chosen for the job, Chicago observers say, because he hasproven he can sway votes and is willing to take the risk of losing acontroversial battle.
Clinton needssomeone with political sense to move this thing through Congress, and Daleyhas the connections,' says a fellow Washington lobbyist.
Opposition to Nafta comes from core Democratic constituencies, making it apotential political pothole for Mr Clinton.
The president needs 218 votes in the House to ratify Nafta.
Clintonally and fellow Chicago Democrat, Mr Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the Houseways and means committee, is expected to deliver the 20 Democrats on hiscommittee.
By rough count, Mr Daley will have to marshall 73 votes from Democraticrepresentatives of states standing to gain the most from the agreement:those along the border with Mexico and those with big agricultural, consumerproduct, or manufacturing export interests.
Mr Perot'spopulist anti-Nafta campaign touts the 'giant sucking sound' that will beheard as Nafta-loosened jobs flow south of the Texas border.'It is a very interesting juxtaposition of styles,' says Chicago politicalcommentator Mr Bruce DuMont.
You maynot see him, but you'll see the results.'Mr Daley has taken four months out from his Chicago law firm to lead theNafta push.
Mr Clinton may be banking on Mr Daley's union ties to help the Nafta effort.
However, Mr Daley, by pushing Nafta, runs the risk of alienating his unionsupporters.