Canadian Ben Johnson left the Olympicstoday ``in a complete state of shock,'' accused of cheating withdrugs in the world's fastest 100-meter dash and stripped of hisgold medal.
Many athletes accepted the accusation that Johnson used amuscle-building but dangerous and illegal anabolic steroid calledstanozolol as confirmation of what they said they know has beengoing on in track and field.
``Everybody uses drugs,'' said sprinter Horace Dove-Edwin ofSierra Leone.
``If you could cut him into a million pieces and test him overagain, my brother is not on drugs,'' she said.
Two tests of Johnson's urine sample proved positive and hisdenials of drug use were rejected today.
Neither a spiked sarsparilla in his track bag, as his coachsuggested, nor a switched sample at the lab could have accountedfor the levels of steroids found in the tests, officials said.
In a middle-of-the-night meeting with Olympic and Canadianofficials, family members, coach and manager, Johnson, 26,forfeited his most prized possession, the medal he'd had in hishands for only three days.
The world's fastest human also was automatically suspended frominternational competition for two years and banned from Canada'snational team for life.
``He appeared to be in a complete state of shock and notcomprehending the situation,'' said Canada's chief of mission,Carol Anne Letheren.
``Ben was not able to discuss or articulateanything at that moment ...
In Canada, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said the scandal was a``personal tragedy for Ben and his family.
James Worrall, a Canadian member of the IOC, said Johnson ``hasbeen killed'' as an athlete.
He said the sprinter's once-favoredstatus as a hero to many sports fans in Canada, his native Jamaica,and around the world now will be tarnished.
``I feel sorry forBen and for the Canadian people,'' he said today.
``Ben is a greatcompetitor and I hope he is able to straighten out his life andreturn to competition.''
After Saturday's race, though, Lewis had said he couldn'tunderstand how Johnson could run as fast as he did after lookingtired in qualifying heats.
Lewis has previously alleged widespreaddrug use in track and field.