This is the question the House of Representatives is scheduled to take up today when it votes on the Family Welfare Reform Act of 1987.
The bill proposes $5.2 billion in new spending over five years, and most of that will increase benefits currently received by welfare recipients.
It appears that what we have here is something of a Trojan horse -- a piece of legislation that is represented as "reform" when all it does is expand existing welfare programs.
The proposed new spending on welfare should be viewed as an investment, say its proponents, led by Rep. Thomas Downey.
At the same time they say, certain existing benefits -- mainly Aid to Families With Dependent Children (AFDC) -- must be increased to offset real declines since the base year of 1970.
House members on both sides of the aisle agree that welfare-to-work programs are worthwhile.
That conclusion was presumably the basis for the bipartisan consensus that was going to produce a serious welfare-reform bill this year.
The bulk of the new money would go to higher AFDC pay-outs, extension of mandatory benefits to two-parent families and maintenance of certain benefits for welfare recipients earning some income.
In short, the Family Welfare Reform Act amounts to an expanded investment in the status quo.
So the House's liberal majority hoped to achieve an increase in welfare outlays by making a bow to "reform."
In fact, while the level of AFDC benefits has decreased in real terms since 1970, the total level of all welfare benefits has not.
Together, spending for the seven major welfare programs (those just mentioned plus the Women, Infants and Children program and the Low Income Energy Assistance program) has actually increased since 1970 by 232% in constant dollars, to an annual total $65.7 billion.
The House Democrats' claim that welfare recipients are worse off than they were in 1970 -- in terms of the level of benefits received -- is dubious.
Measured in the terms that really count -- namely the number of welfare dependents liberated from the rolls -- the situation has become worse.
It is difficult to accept that the $4.3 billion increase in basic benefits proposed in the Family Welfare Reform Act will do much of anything about the problem of hard-core welfare dependency.
By further increasing rather than gradually reducing the level of benefits available to recipients, it makes welfare more, not less, enticing.
Earlier this year, there were hopeful signs that we would see sweeping, serious welfare-reform legislation emerge from Congress.