Introduction:IN VIRGINIA the North American Free Trade Agreement evokes a passionateopposition, but football, apparently, still is the reigning obsession.
A 'not this Nafta' rally on Saturday provided little competition for thecollege 'game of the century' - Florida State University against Notre Dame.
Theorganisers said they were sending a message to Virginia's three waveringcongressmen that a 'yes' vote on Nafta in the House on Wednesday would be'remembered in November'.
That is, next November's mid-term elections, whenthose assembled - mostly followers of Texas billionaires of Mr Ross Perotand union members - would unite to throw the rascals out of office.'We are absolutely for free trade,' says Mr Bill Diggitt, the state directorof
He says he is concerned about the loss of Virginia'stax base as companies move production to Mexico and place continuousdownward pressure on wages.'The administration is selling everything it can to every congressman itcan.
Mr Josh Greenwood, owner of a small hydroelectric company, says: 'I mightrun against my congressman myself.'Mexican workers are treated like slaves, he claims.
In Virginia there wasslavery, but the slaves were expensive and the people who owned them valuedthem.
The babies of the slaves weren't born with braindamage from concentrated pollution.'Virginia has 11 congressmen.
Three have joined the anti-Nafta forces; fivehave declared themselves in favour of the pact.
As a member of the House armed services committee heexpects the foreign policy implications of the Nafta vote to weigh heavilyin his decision.
Mr Ralph Dombrower,a Perot devotee, brought the results of an interactive computer poll showinga growing isolationism among American voters.'The public is becoming less inclined to see the US as arbiter of worldwidehuman behaviour and wishes to get out of our foreign policy involvements,'he says.
The Virginia business community began a pro-Nafta lobbying effort lastMarch.
For Nafta.
The coalition - 100 of the state's largest businesses and 500 small andmedium-sized companies - counter-attacked with an 'education' campaign.
Company employees were exhorted to write or call their congressman.
The anti-Nafta forces on Saturday published long lists of businesscontributors to the pro-Nafta congressmen.
Constituents only have votes togive, and it seems these congressmen are having a hard time hearing theirmessage,' the cover page said.
On Friday, after the fifth pro-Nafta congressman announced his position, adispirited Lorrie Beckwith, an opposition organiser, said her campaign hadbeen hindered early on by a lack of unity.
But if he is offered a decent project,he says he might find it tough to say no.'In Portsmouth, Virginia, one of the last undecided congressmen, OwenPickett, is in his district office, as he is every weekend.
His door bears asign, 'This office belongs to the people of the second district ofVirginia'.The unionised port workers are urging opposition.