Introduction:   ``Mad cow disease'' has killed 10,000 cattle,restricted the export market for Britain's cattle industry andraised fears about the safety of eating beef.
The government insists the disease poses only a remote risk tohuman health, but scientists still aren't certain what causes thedisease or how it is transmitted.
Mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE,was diagnosed only in 1986.
The incurable disease eats holes in the brains of its victims; inlate stages a sick animal may act skittish or stagger drunkenly.
The government banned the use of sheep offal in cattle feed inJune 1988, and later banned the use of cattle brain, spleen,thymus, intestines and spinal cord in food for humans.
Earlier this month, the government announced it would payfarmers 100 percent of market value or average market price,whichever is less, for each animal diagnosed with BSE.
but that the public would feel more confident that noBSE-infected animal would ever be likely to go anywhere near thefood chain if there was 100 percent compensation,'' said Sir SimonGourlay, president of the National Farmers Union.
The disease struck one of his own cows, Gourlay said.
Because of the disease, the U.S. Department of Agriculture'sAnimal and Plant Health Inspection Service banned imports ofcattle, embryos and bull semen from Great Britain in July, saidMargaret Webb, a USDA spokeswoman in Washington.
David Maclean, a junior agriculture minister, has complained of``BSE hysteria'' in the media and has insisted that the risk of thedisease passing to humans is ``remote.''
A commission chaired by Professor Sir Richard Southwood ofOxford University reported last year that the cause of BSE ``isquite unlike any bacteria or known viruses.''
The report said the disease was impossible to detect inapparently healthy animals because it did not prompt the immunesystem to produce antibodies.
The Southwood report said it was ``most unlikely'' that thedisease was a threat to humans.
There is a human variant of spongiform encephalopathy, known asCreutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
According to a report in the British Medical Journal, theincidence of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is no higher in Britain thanit is in countries free of scrapie.
``It is urgent that the same reassurance can be given about thelack of effect of BSE on human health,'' a consultative committeereported to the agriculture ministry.
The committee's report,released early this year, said it is only a ``shrewd guess'' thatBSE was transmitted through sheep offal in cattle feed.