Flexing its muscles as a cartel, De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. is raising its diamond prices an average 10% next month.
The South African concern, which controls 80% of the world diamond market through its London-based Central Selling Organization, sells a vast array of diamonds, varying in quality and size, dealers say.
The rise follows an average price increase of 14.5% last year.
"The diamond price increase was expected," said Jacques Zucker, of Lachowsky Zucker, diamond dealers in Antwerp, Belgium.
By changing the mix of diamonds that it sells to dealers several months ago, De Beers signaled to the market that it intended to raise quotes, he said.
"Few listened to us two years ago when we advised clients to buy diamonds at depressed values," Mr. Zucker said.
"The price rise provides the necessary psychological lift to the market," said Peter Miller, a mining analyst at Shearson Lehman Securities in London.
" Prices of one-carat D-flawless diamonds have risen to about $14,800 a carat from $12,000 at the beginning of the year, dealers said.
De Beers decided to raise prices because rough diamonds were already trading at a premium over its own quotes on the open market, said Andrew Lamont, a company spokesman.
In the first seven months of 1987, Japanese imports of polished diamonds surged 60% from the similar period last year to $777 million, he added.
To meet growing orders from diamond dealers and cutters who supply the retail trade, De Beers sales of rough diamonds jumped to $1.56 billion in the first half of this year from $1.2 billion in the similar period in 1986.
Sales of $2.56 billion last year were the highest since the 1980 boom when De Beers turnover reached $2.72 billion.
Yet some dealers worry because world diamond production surged to 89.6 million carats last year from 47 million carats in 1982.
An advertising and promotion budget which rose to $110 million this year from $43 million in 1980 helped raise world-wide sales of diamond jewelry to a record 49 million pieces valued at $24.6 billion last year.
In 1979, about 42 million pieces valued at $16 billion were sold, De Beers says.
The cartel controls most of the world's rough diamond market via a "pipeline" that stretches from mines in Africa to Australia to diamond dealers and cutters.