The official opening of the Channel Tunnel later this year promises to helprevitalise the north-west regions of Belgium, even though the country'sbiggest ports will suffer a loss of traffic.
The chambers of commerce in Veurne and Courtrai, along with the WestFlanders Regional Development Authority in Bruges, are gearing up to becomepart of what they refer to as the 'new European Metropolitan Area.'This takes in the Nord-Pas de Calais in France, Western Flanders and Hainautin Belgium, and Kent in the UK.The potential for this region is enormous.
According to Mr Anthony VandeCandelare, an urban planner who made a study of the influence of the ChannelTunnel on the west of Belgium and the North of France: 'Overnight, theBelgian coast and the North of France will become the centre of Europe.'Mr Jo Libeer, managing director of the Courtrai chamber of commerce, isequally optimistic about the likely impact on the area of the tunnel.'With the TGV and the chunnel this region, which was sort of in the cornerof Europe, will now be in the middle of a new developing area,' he says.
And overthe last 10 to 12 months it has taken a distinct turn for the worse.'Furthermore, Flanders, the area most likely to benefit from the arrival ofthe tunnel, has recently suffered more rapid increases in unemployment thanin Wallonia and the Brussels region.
The Belgian chambers in the regions most directly affected believe there aretwo main areas for development: firstly, increasing traffic through westernFlanders as holidaymakers and freight carriers head towards thetunnel-opening in Calais; and secondly tourism.
Furthermore, Belgium's biggest ports are expecting traffic loads to fall, asfreight and passengers are directed towards Calais.
Mr Geert Sanders, who worksfor the Regional Development Authority of West Flanders, says there isalready evidence that the region's enhanced communications are attractingnew businesses.
There is, however, a danger that Belgium will not make the most of thecommercial opportunities - 'we will try to attract new industry, but ourregion is very small and our industrial zones are full,' says Mr LudoVerstraete, of the Veurne chamber of commerce.
The Belgian authorities havedragged their feet over decisions to dedicate new areas, he says.
As Mr Claerhout says: 'Weneed to convince people from other countries that it is worth their while tostop in Westhoek at the time of their journey through the North of Europe toEngland.'The potential is there.
West Flanders is home to some of the best-knownWorld War One battlefields, and promoters of the region insist that itslarge, open green spaces will, when properly developed, attract foreignvisitors.
Ithas been slower to develop the tourist potential of the Channel Tunnel thanFrance.
Around Calais, a commercial and leisure centre, hotels and activity parks,known as 'La Cite de L'Europe', are springing up while Lille is home toEuralille, a similar development.
As Mr Verstraete of the Veurne chamber ofcommerce says: 'Tourism is very important .
In a Europe without frontiers, this will be the most effectiveway of benefiting from the the Channel Tunnel.