Here is a brief look at forest fire developments in the Westernstates:   About 2.1 million acres are smoldering from 30 fires, thefederal Bureau of Land Management said.
Sue Mitchell, a BLM spokeswoman, said there were no active, orflaming, fires and all but a few firefighters have been recalledfrom the blazes.
Two new fires flared Wednesday in the Sierra National Forest,one over about 1,800 acres west of Kings Canyon National Park; theother near Mariposa, outside Yosemite National Park.
Fire crews mobilized in the Star Valley of eastern Idaho afterthe 6,800-acre Trail Creek fire, fanned by shifting winds, brokethrough a control line and raced to within a mile of ranches andgrain fields.
The 7,900-acre Eagle Bar fire near Hells Canyon at the Oregonline burned out of control for the 12th day.
Montana's three largest fires are burning primarily inwilderness areas: the 51,000-acre Canyon Creek fire in theScapegoat Wilderness in northwest Montana; and the 43,000-acreStorm Creek fire and 42,000-acre Hellroaring Creek fire in theAbsaroka-Beartooth Wilderness north of Yellowstone National Park.
The Canyon Creek fire is burning toward several ranches outsidethe wilderness, while firefighters are trying to prevent the othertwo fires from burning south into the park.
The governor said 5,000 firefighters were battling blazes on208,000 acres in Montana, and 173,000 acres burned in earlierfires.
Oregon's Department of Forestry announced Wednesday that 3.8million acres of private, state and other forest in eastern Oregonwould be closed until further notice due to extreme fire danger andscarce resources to fight new blazes.
Oregon's biggest forest fire, the Tepee Butte fire, has burned36,000 acres of grass and timber on the Wallowa-Whitman NationalForest and the Hell's Canyon National Recreation Area.
The Forest Service began training the first of 700 back-upfirefighters to spell weary crews in Oregon and Washington.
Crews cut trails around major fires along the Kettle River Rangeon the Colville Indian Reservation and in Colville National Forest.
The state's largest fire was burning on the Indian reservation,where 9,250 acres of timber and brush have burned.
The south entrance of Yellowstone National Park may reopen todayas winds are forecast to calm.
Eight fires are burning more than one-fifth of the park's 2.2million acres.
To the south in the Bridger-Teton National Forest, strong windspushed the 42,000-acre Huck fire 7,000 acres to the east Tuesday.