TransManche Link, the construction consortium building the``Chunnel'' said the historic linkup occurred at 8:25 p.m. Tuesdaywhen British workers sent a probe 2 inches in diameter through totheir French colleagues.
Linking England and France, the tunnel symbolizes the growingunification of Europe.
It also fulfills a dream of Napoleon, whowanted to send his armies through the tunnel to conquer Britain.
Eurotunnel PLC, the Anglo-French consortium overseeing theworld's largest engineering project, plans for high-speed trains topass through the Channel Tunnel in June 1993.
Eventually a train trip from Paris to London should take threehours.
Despite her countrymen's fears of losing their ancient moatagainst Europe, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher describedthe breakthrough as ``a very exciting moment.''
In London, the conservative Daily Express newspaper noted todaythat Britons will be able to walk to France for the first timesince the Ice Age.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' a construction unionofficial in Calais said.
Threading a spinning probe the width of agarden hose through 100 yards of chalk under the Channel bears thefirst tangible fruit in three years of drilling.
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole.
The tunneling machine on the French side will then guide itselfby laser toward the British machine, ensuring perfect alignment.
Thatcher and French President Francois Mitterrand will meetmid-tunnel on Jan. 26.
The linkup came on the maintenance tunnel, the smallest of threetunnels being dug.
Since the tunnel construction began in 1987 there have beenseven accidental deaths on the British side and two on the Frenchside.
The tunnel's cost has soared from an initial estimate of $9.4billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion in caseof unforeseen cost overruns.
Mechanical legs slap togetherthe concrete tunnel lining in the wake of the advancing drill head.
Whhen its work is done, the drilling machine on the French sidewill be hauled out in pieces.
The tunnels were joined 13{ miles southeast of Folkestone,England, the British terminus near Dover, and 10 miles northwest ofSangatte, near Calais.
Militant workers on the French side are striking for more payand began a work slowdown Thursday, threatening to stall thelink-up.
Officials estimate the tunnel trains may carry 28 millionpassengers in the first year of operation.
Britain warned Napoleon not to try to build the tunnel; diggingwas started subsequently in 1882 and 1974, but both efforts failed.