As federal army tanks and jetspounded the breakaway republic of Slovenia last week, thepin-striped brokers of the Ljubljana Stock Exchange defiedair-raid dangers and gathered in their sixth-floor tradingroom.
Yesterday, with a tenuous peace settling over Slovenia,the exchange panicked.
The foreign exchange rights went begging."There is a certain logic to this," says DraskoVeselinovic, the exchange's chief executive.
"Slovenes arenow beginning to see the costs of independence more clearlythan when we were at war."The two million people of this picturesque Alpine republicare waking up from their two-week nightmare sobered by theimplications of their intoxicating declaration of secessionfrom Yugoslavia on June 25.
But there is also a growing unease about goingforward, because no one knows where Slovenia is headed.
Their considerabletrade with the rest of Yugoslavia, which helped make them thecountry's richest people, is vanishing.
Their identity isbeing turned upside down; once known as Yugoslavia's"developed north," Slovenia will now be lumped together withWestern Europe's "underdeveloped south."
Almost every country on thecontinent has its own disenchanted minorities, from theSoviet Baltics to French Corsica, that could be encouraged bythe independence declarations of Slovenia and the neighboringrepublic of Croatia.
While the European Community is counting on the peace planit brokered to defuse tensions (it calls for a three-monthperiod of negotiations in Yugoslavia), most governmentsconcede that the country's breakup is inevitable.
But that doesn't mean we can acceptthe unilateral alteration of frontiers."This shunning by Western Europe, and the U.S., isparticularly disillusioning for a people who enjoy theirBMWs, Peugeots and Fiats, their shopping trips to Munich andVenice and their vacation chalets in the Alps.
The Slovenes,from their days in the Austro-Hungarian empire, have alwaysconsidered themselves to be Westerners.
Nestled between the Alps and the Adriatic, Slovenia becamethe most prosperous patch of communist Europe.
But as Slovenes measurethemselves with Western Europe, it is they who are the poorercousins.
"Unfortunately, in times oftransition like this, people's expectations are often wrong.
But Slovene economists reckon thatexports would have to double to match the performance ofother small European countries.
Slovenia is counting onexpanding its already extensive ties with Austria (a jointventure between Austrian and Slovene companies recentlycompleted a high-tech Alpine tunnel opening another bordercrossing) as well as courting more business with its otherold Austro-Hungarian partners, Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
But what Slovenes dream of is one day being admitted tothe EC.
"It's not size that makes a country successful," saysJosip Skoberne, head of the international division of theSlovene Chamber of Economy, citing EC-member Luxembourg, farsmaller in population and area than Slovenia.
"It's yourability to engage in international trade that makes youviable."Finding new markets in the West is all the more urgentwith the certain decline in Slovenia's trade with the rest ofYugoslavia.
A quarter of all goods produced in Slovenia arepurchased by other Yugoslavs, and Slovene leaders counted onmaintaining these ties even after declaring independence.
One of the major motivations behind Slovenia'sindependence grab was to free itself from the "Yugoslav risk"that hampered most attempts to attract foreign investment.
At the stock exchange, Mr. Veselinovic frets that hispost-independence plans to trade in gold, commodities andforeign currencies are jeopardized by the uncertaintyengulfing Slovenia."We had been getting a lot of interest from abroad, butthey won't invest now while things are so unsettled," hesays.