Rescuers crawled through collapsed homesand shops today looking for more victims of a tornado that carved a3-mile stretch of destruction, killing 17 people, injuring 463 andleaving 1,000 homeless.
``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in ablender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker BobCaraway, whose specialty is cave rescues.
The tornado was one of a series that touched down Wednesday inan arc spanning at least seven states from the Deep South to theMidwest.
The other tornadoes caused at least 19 injuries andfar-flung property damage.
In Huntsville, teams with cranes and floodlights searched forthe injured or dead, hampered by wind-whipped rain and temperaturesthat plummeted overnight from 73 degrees into the 30s.
Gov. Guy Hunt sent 50 National Guardsmen to help and said hewould view damage Friday.
His spokesman, Terry Abbott, said aerialsurveys indicate the twister hopped along a 25-mile path, much ofit straight through Huntsville.
The National Weather Service put out a tornado watch forparts of Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York,all of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and parts of Massachusetts,Vermont and New Hampshire.
In Pennsylvania, the weather service said it receivedunconfirmed reports of a tornado that turned over a car and knockeddown trees and power lines near Gettysburg.
In Georgia, 19 people were injured, four critically, and atleast 200 people were evacuated after a tornado strus.
C., and a tornadotoppled trees, downedpower lines and damaged 20 houses near Greenwood, S.C. No injurieswere reported in either state.
Tornadoes caused minor property damage in Mississippi, Kentuckyand Indiana.
In West Virginia, high winds believed to be tornadoes sweptJefferson County early today, overturning trailers, blowing roofsoff homes and downing power lines, authorities said.
Heavy thunderstorms destroyed at least a dozen homes inAlorton, Ill., killing one person and injuring 20 others, fiveseriously, authorities said.
The tornado struck Huntsville with virtually no warningWednesday afternoon as the city's streets grew busy with theapproach of rush hour.
In a matter of seconds, cars were hurledthrough the air and crushed, and apartments and stores looked as ifthey had been bombed.
Huntsville Police Maj. Robert Moder said this morning that 463people were injured by the twister, which plowed through a schooland rural areas as well as a shopping mall and adjacent apartments.
Police Chief Richard Ottman initially put the number of dead at19, but his clerk, Kitty Whitworth, later said the death toll waslowered to 17 after police confirmed the count of bodies.
No children in the school were killed, but about 30 youngsterswere in a kindergarten class at the building, and five werereported injured.
Most of the dead were in apartments, stores orcars.
A worker at a building owned by the Madison County Jaycees said42
The tornado was Alabama's deadliest since a 1975 twister killed22 people in Birmingham, said Danny Cooper, state emergencymanagement director in Montgomery.
Along a highway near a destroyed apartment complex, cars wereflipped and smashed into telephone poles and crushed by trees.
``It came in with a huge roar, an enormous amount of water, andit just started shaking and tearing at everything it could get holdof,'' said real estate broker Ike Carroll, who was in his car.
Heavy overhead power lines ``started snapping just like a circusperformer would snap his whip,'' Carroll said.
Kenneth Lenhard had undergone an operation at the CrestwoodHospital on Wednesday and returned to his room about an hour beforea window in the next room blew out as the tornado passed.
At least two other tornadoes were reported in Alabama, injuringat least three people in addition to the Huntsville total.
resident Jeff Bryant said his home at theSweetbriar Mobile Home Park near Interstate 85 began to vibratewhen the twister approached.
It did not sound like a train.
Thomas Farr was driving on Interstate 85 when the tornado hit.``It was picking up cars and tossing them like toys off theinterstate,'' he said.