An annual Agriculture Department surveyconfirmed Thursday that a deadening drought will curtail the fallcorn harvest by a third or more, resulting in higher retail foodprices for months and years to come.
However, government officials said bountiful crops in recentyears has built stockpiles so high the United States need not fearactual shortages on grocery shelves and can even continue exportingfood.
The report came hours after President Reagan signed a $3.9billion relief bill that he acknowledged won't bring rain to cropsalready sweltering, but hopefully will help farmers survive toplant again next spring.
The new surveys led USDA experts to predict the 1988 corn cropwill total 4.48 billion bushels, down 37 percent from last year'sharvest and the smallest output since 1983.
Overall, the department's Agricultural Statistics Board puttotal U.S. crop production at 88 percent of the 1977 average, ascale used to compare output from year to year.
The corn crop is expected to average 78.5 bushels per harvestedacre, down from 119.4 bushel per acre last year, a recordyear-to-year decline of 34 percent.
Wilson, the department's chiefeconomist, said the drought may add 1 percent to the cost of foodthis year, 2 percent next year.
``Today's reports confirm that the drought has had a majorimpact on this year's crops,'' Wilson told reporters.
Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate AgricultureCommittee, said in a statement, ``Today's crop report confirms ourfears about the impacts of this summer's tragic drought.
The USDA's grim news came hours after President Reagan onThursday signed a $3.9 billion disaster relief bill aimed athelping drought-stricken farmers recover.
In May and June, before drought had made its biggestimpact, USDA projected the corn harvest _ based on trends and anassumption of normal weather _ at 7.3 billion bushels.
But those projections were revised downward a month ago to 5.2billion bushels, assuming farmers got normal weather the remainderof the season.
The soybean harvest was estimated at 1.47 billion bushels, down23 percent from 1.9 billion bushels produced last year.
Production of all wheat was indicated at 1.82 billion bushels,down 13 percent from 2.1 billion produced in 1987.
Winter wheat production was estimated at 1.55 billion bushels,down 1 percent from last year.
Durum was estimated at 54.6 million bushels, down 41 percentfrom last year's harvest, and other spring wheat was shown at 212million bushels, down 53 percent from 1987.
Cotton production was estimated at 14.9 million bales, up 1percent from last year.
Department officials said U.S. grain production this year isexpected to total 192 million metric tons, 31 percent smaller thanthe 1987 output.
In addition to the reductions in corn and soybean yields, Wilsonsaid production of some other spring-planted crops has suffered,including: oats, 206 million bushels, down 45 percent; barley, 288million bushels, also down 45 percent; and sorghum, 561 millionbushels, down 24 percent.
Wilson said USDA experts ``continue to believe that the droughtwill add only one percentage point'' to consumer food prices thisyear.
The department has forecast a food price increase this year of 3percent to 5 percent.
Wilson said the drought could add 2 percent to the consumerprice index for food next year.
``That's on top of an additional estimated increase in foodprices somewhere in the region of 4 percent,'' Wilson said.
He also said the United States is ``looking at an exportsituation that is not as good as it was a year ago.''
Thereremained a possibility that the United States would import somesoybeans this year, Wilson said.
``The drought, as you can see, is still basically with usthroughout the entire United States,'' Strommen said.