Introduction:Freshman congressman Larkin Smith (R-Miss.) died in a light plane crash in Mississippi, authorities said Monday, making him the second member of the House killed in an aviation accident in a week.
Smith and the pilot, Charles Vierling, who also was killed, were flying from Hattiesburg to Gulfport, according to federal and local officials.
"There was a 300-foot-long path cut by the plane," Harrison County Sheriff's Department Capt.
Smith, 45, died the same day the wreckage of a plane carrying Rep. Mickey Leland (D-Tex.) and 15 others was found on an Ethiopian mountainside.
Leland's plane had been missing almost a week after he took off on a fact-finding mission to combat hunger.
At the White House, spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said President and Mrs. Bush "deeply regret" Smith's death, adding that Smith, who was elected to a seat vacated by Sen. Trent Lott (R-Miss.), "was just beginning a promising career in the Congress.
" Smith, a former sheriff and police chief, was already developing a reputation on the House Judiciary Committee as a zealous opponent of illegal drugs.
Jack Barker, a Federal Aviation Administration spokesman here, said the plane "lost radar contact" at 9:25.
He said area residents "heard the airplane crash" and notified officials.
I thought at the time it was unusual for a plane to be in the area at night."
He said he heard a "revving sound and then a crash."
The plane belonged to the Institute for Marine Mammal Studies Inc. in Gulfport.
The institute immediately issued a statement saying that Smith had requested use of the plane "to accommodate his busy schedule."
Jody Canady, a spokeswoman, said Smith was to reimburse the institute.
The statement said the plane, manufactured in 1973, and purchased by the institute last year, had a "current inspection."
He was Harrison County Sheriff from 1984 to 1989, and was Gulfport police chief from 1977 to 1983.
As sheriff, Smith coordinated anti-drug efforts of federal, local and state agencies across five states.
Smith, survived by a wife and one child, was lauded by Mississippi Gov. Ray Mabus, who called his death "a tragic loss" for the state and ordered flags on state property flown at half staff.
Gaston, who worked for Smith nine years both in the sheriff's department and earlier when Smith was Gulfport police chief, called Smith "a pillar of strength.