On Wednesday, the Slovene soldiersmanning this border post raised a new flag to mark Slovenia'sindependence from Yugoslavia.
Yesterday, under artillery firefrom the federal army, they waved a white flag andsurrendered as Yugoslavia lurched closer to civil war.
Less than two days after Slovenia and Croatia, two ofYugoslavia's six republics, unilaterally seceded from thenation, the federal government in Belgrade mobilized troopsto regain control.
Accompanied by tanks, jet fighters,helicopters, the regular troops, including paratroopers,battled Slovene militiamen across the breakaway republic.
Local militiamen shot down a federalarmy helicopter as it flew over the capital, killing thepilot and co-pilot, the Associated Press reported.
To put it briefly, Slovenia is at war," he said.
In Croatia, the army moved into areas where fightingerupted between Croats and minority Serbs, Yugoslavia's twolargest nationalities and historic rivals.
The first shooting between the federal army and themilitias occurred here, in the mountains that mark the borderwith Austria.
Throughout the morning, federal soldiers, somebearing bazookas, fanned out in the woods surrounding theSlovenia customs house.
Here, the drama was watched by several Yugoslavstrying to return to their country from Austria; the cooks,waitresses and a few guests at restaurants on both sides ofthe border; several tourists who were caught on the Yugoslavside; and a dozen Austrian customs officers and policemen.
Slovenes watching the action were horrified, as theconsequences of their independence grab became clear."Yesterday we had a big party, and today we're fighting,"moaned Bogataj Vejko, a truck driver from near Ljubljana,
After the shooting stopped, he talked to a group ofthe federal soldiers, and discovered that some wereconscripts from Slovenia.
The first shots that have been fired inSlovenia since after World War II," he said.
"If we want ourfreedom, we will now have to defend it."In Ljubljana, Milan Kucan, Slovenia's president, vowed ina television address that the republic's militia wouldrespond with "all methods" to any aggression against his"independent state."
He called on Slovenes in the federalarmy to desert and join the republic's militia.
But the poorly trained and equipped Slovene and Croatianmilitias, formed in the past several months, are no match forthe 180,000-strong federal army.
Politically, the two republics' declarations ofindependence have been ignored by the rest of the world,which supports a united Yugoslavia.
But U.S. Secretary of State James Baker appealed toBelgrade to find a way for Croatia and Slovenia to expresstheir "national aspirations" through "negotiations anddialogue" rather than bloodshed.
Mr. Baker and White Housespokesman Marlin Fitzwater had suggested to reportersWednesday that the breakaway republics be granted greaterautonomy and sovereignty within a united Yugoslavia.
The federal army, dominated by Serbs, has long warned thatit won't stand by while the country disintegrates.
And onTuesday night, after the two republics declared theirindependence, the federal parliament called on the army tointervene.
In a letter to Slovenia's premier, Gen. KonradKolsek of the federal military district that controlsSlovenia said he had orders to seize all border crossings andwould "crush" any resistence.
The independence declarations came after months ofunsuccessful negotiations among the leaders of the sixrepublics over the post-Cold War shape of Yugoslavia.
The nationalistgovernments of Slovenia and Croatia have been demanding alooser confederation of sovereign republics.
Serbian attempts to deny Croatia and Slovenia theirindependence are motivated by two fears.
They worry that the600,000 Serbs living in Croatia (about 11% of that republic'spopulation) will be discriminated against by the Croatiangovernment.
And they fear losing the economic support ofSlovenia and Croatia, the two wealthiest republics.
Together, Slovenia, with two million people, and Croatia,with five million, supply nearly two-thirds of Yugoslavia'sforeign exchange and about half of the country's grossnational product.