The conditions are familiarto South Bay firefighters, who know they may be no more than a careless matchaway from a blaze as intense and unpredictable as the one that devastated theOakland hills last Sunday.
Now, in the wake of that firestorm, local firefighters are looking up atthe hills that surround this area and wondering not whether, but only when andwhere."I know it's there," said Saratoga Fire Chief Ernest Kraule.
"Everyfire chief -- there's 12 of us in this county -- knows it's there."Thedanger is in the Saratoga foothills, where Kraule's department has battlednine deliberately set fires since June -- most recently Oct. 19, the same dayOakland firefighters thought they had contained a brush fire
It's in the mountain communities thatstraddle Highway 9 in Santa Cruz County, isolated by weak bridges that won'tsupport some firetrucks and connected by a two-lane road that will hinderescape.
It's in Los Altos Hills, where residents in 1984 repealed anordinance requiring fire-retardant roofs; a year later, a fire destroyed 100acres and 12 homes, many of which have been rebuilt -- with the same flammableshake roofs.
In fact, the danger of an Oakland-like inferno is in almostall of the hills that ring the South Bay, where homes often are surrounded bydense brush or stately trees, the fuel of rapidly spreading wildfires.
two-inch pipes."Those are the risks you take when you live in an arealike this," said Dean Lucke, chief of the forestry department's SanMateo-Santa Cruz ranger unit.
But there areexceptions, such as narrow Kilkare Canyon near Sunol, where 200 homes arestrung along a narrow, five-mile dead-end road that empties onto narrow,winding Niles Canyon Road."A large concentration of vegetation, heavy fuelloads, lots of wooden structures, ingress-egress (problems), lack of water,they're all there," said Fremont Fire Chief Dan Lydon, whose department wouldbe one of the first called to a fire in Kilkare.
If there's an area that hasthe significant potential for disaster, that's one."Codes rarely enforced;  In the hills, nearly every home is surrounded by thick brush or dense woods.
Fire codes require residents to keep the trees 30 feet from their homes, butfire officials admit they rarely enforce them.
Instead, as they drive by, somefirefighters make mental notes about which homes would be worth saving."You do this evaluation of what you think you'd be effective at salvaging,"said Don Shaw, a battalion chief for the Palo Alto Fire Department.
By nottrimming dense brush, he said, some homeowners are "virtually signing a deathwarrant."And increasingly, fire officials worry about wildfires spreadinginto even more heavily populated areas at the base of the foothills, wherenumerous trees create an "urban forest.""We could have a fire going fromrooftop to treetop to rooftop to treetop in any number of areas in this city,if the weather conditions are right," said San Jose Fire Chief Robert Osby.
The lesson of the Oakland hills, firefighters say, is to contain andextinguish even the smallest fires as quickly as possible.
But, often, thatmeans firefighters have to overcome narrow roads, weak bridges, inadequatewater pressure and gridlock from fleeing residents.
Challenge forfirefightersMany of the South Bay's most vulnerable areas -- such asRedwood Estates above Los Gatos and Emerald Lake Hills above Redwood City --began as colonies of summer homes, a handful of secluded cottages strung alongnarrow winding roads.
Now, these communities are the year-round home forthousands, often still dependent on volunteer firefighters and an overtaxednetwork of roads and water lines."On a good day, trying to maneuver fireapparatus on those roads is tough," said Steve Cavallero, a battalion chieffor the Redwood City Fire Department, which covers a portion of Emerald LakeHills.
"Combine that with panic, with people getting out of the way, andyou're setting the stage for disaster."An estimated 25,000 people live inthe communities along Highway 9 between Santa Cruz and Boulder Creek, thecurvy, two-lane road that would be the only way out in the case of a majorfire.
Weak bridges keep firetrucks out of many of those communities, aswell as New Almaden Valley south of San Jose, forcing firefighters to carryhoses by hand.
Ed Ekers, chief of the Santa Cruz city fire department,
That could happen even in urbanized areas of Santa Clara Countybecause the major water suppliers rely on a similar system of electric pumpsto maintain water pressure in the foothills.
"We would face the samesituation," said Sharon Whaley, spokeswoman for the San Jose Water Co., whichserves foothill areas in Los Gatos, Saratoga and Almaden.
To MikeBalesteri, chief of the forestry department ranger unit in Santa Clara County,the lesson is simple: "It's either bring your own water or find your own waterin our game."Taps would go dry quicklyEven when rural communities haveupgraded their water systems -- as Redwood Estates did -- firefighters say thetaps would start to run low if three or four houses were burning at once.
Seven years later, the Los Altos Hills revolt against fire-retardant roofsstill resonates in the mind of Los Altos Fire Chief Dick Landrum, whosedepartment is charged with protecting the area."Every time my fire marshalstarts to talk about amendments to the .