But afterword spread that a major earthquake was forecast for Dec. 3in the Midwest, The Fault Line began throwing earthquakeparties.
On Friday nights now, hundreds of patrons pour into theclub to swig "Earthquake shooters" and sign up to win Dec. 3Earthquake Escape Packages to the Bahamas or Hot Springs,Ark. But even as Memphians whoop it up, the prediction that theBig One may come in December is triggering tremors up anddown the Mississippi Valley.
Shaken, thousands of people arecrowding into earthquake survival classes.
In Missouri and Arkansas, some schools and businesses haveannounced plans to close in early December.
Entrepreneurs arehawking quake insurance, survival kits and gas-line safetygadgets.
"You can't run fromeverything," says Tammy McCormick, a nurse in Blytheville,Ark.
But it seems stupid tostay on a fault line with a prediction like this."Everybody talks about the San Andreas fault in California.
In 1811 and 1812, along a120-mile zig-zag formation called the New Madrid fault, aseries of quakes ravaged the Midwest.
They were more than 10times greater than the 7.1 quake that rocked California's BayArea last October.
And as tons of soil and rock bed pitched androlled in a seismic frenzy, new waterfalls spiked up, causingpart of the mighty Mississippi River to flow backward forseveral hours.
The New Madrid (pronounced MAD-rid) fault still has 150small, mostly unfelt, earthquakes a year.
"We're overdue for one inthe 6s and low 7s," says David Stewart, an earthquake expertat Southeast Missouri State University.
Over the years, a few pinpoint-on-the map towns have triedto capitalize on the little-known fault.
Iben Browning, a 72-year-old scientist, predictedOctober's Bay Area quake a week before it happened, saypeople who heard him speak to the Equipment ManufacturersInstitute.
19,1985, along a band of latitude that included Mexico City --where a massive quake struck on that day.
Mr. Browning, who has a Ph.D. in physiology, genetics andbacteriology, writes a climate newsletter out of New Mexico.
Since 1971, Mr. Browning says, he has picked the correctdates of four large earthquakes, two volcanoes -- and one daywith both a volcano and an earthquake.
On Dec. 3, those forces are expectedto be at a 27-year high.
Mr. Browning says that will exertpressure that could trigger faults already ripe to fail.
The New Madrid area has a 50-50 chance of producing atleast a 7 quake on Dec. 3, give or take a day or two oneither side, Mr. Browning says.
At that time, a similar quakehas a lesser chance of occurring on California's San Andreasor Hayward faults, according to Mr. Browning, and an 8.2quake in Tokyo has a greater chance.
"No responsible scientist can predictan exact day for an earthquake," says Brian Mitchell, a quakeexpert at St. Louis University, echoing the majority opinion.
But Mr. Browning shouldn't be written off so quickly, saysSoutheast Missouri State's Mr. Stewart,
who recently spentfour days with Mr. Browning.
He has a methodology that candetermine, plus or minus a window of a day or two, anenhanced probability of a volcano or an earthquake in certainlatitudes," says Mr. Stewart.
"No one else has been able toreplicate it, but that doesn't mean it's wrong."Mr. Browning says it's not easy being on record withpredictions that few other scientists will support.
Salespeople from aMemphis company pop up at survival seminars with a device(for $259 and up) that turns off gas lines when a quake hits.
One says, "I'm staying," the other, "I'mleaving."All of this has changed life in places like Blytheville,Ark.
So many people plan to skip town on Dec. 3 that theFlexible Technologies tubing plant already plans to shut downfor two days, at a cost of thousands of dollars.
Says JimmyConnell, plant superintendent, "It's going to be a ghost townaround here."Robert Edwards, a Blytheville fireman who teaches seminarsin earthquake survival, has become a hot property.
Now hisphone-answering machine says he is almost completely bookedthrough October.
For one recent class, he was in Osceola, Ark. It is 9 a.m.on a rainy Saturday, and 325 Osceolans, gripping legal padsand spiral notebooks, fill the high school auditorium for anall-day session on earthquake preparedness.
Scared that the big Memphis-Arkansas bridge that spans theMississippi River will collapse in a quake, she's charting analternate route two hours out of her way.
School districts in Earle and Wilson, Ark., have announcedclosings around Dec. 3.
Trying to calm the fear, the National EarthquakePrediction Evaluation Council, a panel of academic andgovernment seismic experts, will review the Browning claim ata meeting in a few weeks.
quakes)."But this one," says Randall Updike, the executivesecretary, "has created such chaos in the mid-continentregion that we felt we had to give our advice."Mr. Browning says he is tentatively booked to give a talkin Minneapolis on Dec. 3 and he doesn't plan to go there viaSt. Louis.
That will kill more people than earthquakes."