The label "black conservative," now firmly affixed to Clarence Thomas' name,does not begin to tell the story of his life, an American story oftransformation.
Born barnyard poor in segregated Georgia, forsaken bytheir father, Thomas and his brother were reared by strict Bible-believinggrandparents who taught him to never say, "I can't."
Thomas and his brother made it in the white world.
In a hostile world, they taught himto rely on himself.
They shaped his views on individualism, race and society,views that guide him today."I was raised to survive under thetotalitarianism of segregation," Thomas wrote in a paper for the HeritageFoundation, a conservative public policy institute in Washington.
"Those who attempt to capture the daily counseling,oversight, common sense and vision of my grandparents in a governmentalprogram are engaging in sheer folly."The very beliefs that have broughtThomas to the steps of the U.S. Supreme Court make him suspect to blackpolitical activists, veterans of the struggle to make government accountablefor the wrongs done to blacks.
Yet as Washington Post journalist JuanWilliams has pointed out, Thomas is firmly grounded in the black intellectualtradition of Booker T.
Washington, who advocated education, self-reliance andmutual support as the principal means of advancement.
Before Thomas' second birthday, his father moved to the North and left thefamily behind.
Taken in by grandparentsAt age 7,Thomas was sent to live with his grandparents.
But life had taught him a lot."Hecould barely read and write -- read enough to read the Bible," Thomas said ina 1983 interview with the Washington Post.
His grandfather, a Catholic, enrolled him in anall-black school run by the church.
On Monday, Thomas also made sure to thank"the nuns."As a young man, he wanted to become a priest.
Other seminarians referred to him as the"black spot on a white horse."
Flirts with 'black power'Thomas went on to attend Holy CrossCollege in Worcester, Mass.
In the 1960s, he flirted with the politics of"black power" and considered himself a follower of Malcolm X.
Danforth.
He later joined Monsanto Co. Thomas'introduction to Washington came in 1979.
By then, Danforth was a Republicansenator.
In 1982, after a year as assistant education secretary forcivil rights, Thomas was named by President Reagan to lead the EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission.
Critics said theagency went soft under Thomas.
But the hearings went smoothly, perhaps because Thomas was neveramong the Reagan administration's most outspoken critics of civil rights.
Hetook his seat on the appeals court in March 1990.Thomas, who lives insuburban Virginia, is married and has a son."In my view," he said of hislife Monday, "only in America could this have been possible."