Exxon crews Tuesday finished pumping theremaining crude oil out of the tanker Exxon Valdez in preparationfor refloating and removing the source of the nation's worst-everoil spill.
The fugitive captain of the Exxon Valdez sent signals he wasready to surrender to face criminal charges of operating the vesselwhile drunk.
Meanwhile, Exxon said placing an oil-catching boom around theship immediately after the grounding could have touched off a giantexplosion of gases from the oil, although that was not the reasonit took 11 hours to set the first containment line.
We would have lost the vessel,'' said Exxon ShippingCo. President Frank Iarossi.
A boom wasn't placed around the vessel for 11 hours because itwasn't available in Valdez, Exxon officials have said.
Iarossi also said Exxon has changed its policy because of thespill and now requires crews to be aboard ship, where drinking isprohibited, four hours before sailing.
Early Tuesday, Exxon said it had finished transferring about 42million gallons of crude to three other ships.
Another 42 milliongallons of oily waste water remained aboard the Valdez, whichspilled more than 10 million gallons of crude into Prince WilliamSound when it struck a reef March 24.
The company said crews would attempt to pump air into the holdand refloat the vessel off a reef at high tide Wednesday afternoon.
Exxon then planned to take the ship to a port in the Far East,or to a Portland, Ore., dry dock.
``We're not willing to trade in the environment for jobs,''Portland port spokesman Darrel Buttice said Monday.
Canadian authorities also asked Exxon for assurances there willbe no damage to the British Columbia coast if the tanker is towedto Oregon, and the mayor of Valdez said the ship was not welcomeback in the port where it took on the load of crude.
The family of the fired Exxon Valdez captain, Joseph Hazelwood,said the skipper wants to surrender but is awaiting advice from hisattorney, according to Lt. Thomas Fazio, commander of the New YorkState Police on Long Island.
Hazelwood, 42, is accused operating the ship while under theinfluence of alcohol, reckless endangerment and negligent dischargeof oil.
Of about three dozen oil-soaked otters rescued following thespill, about one-third have died, Alaska Department of Fish andGame spokesman Jon Lyman said.
An effort at Sawmill Bay, 11 miles west of Valdez, to keep oilaway from a hatchery where 2 million salmon are waiting to bereleased to the sea appeared to be failing.
Tendrils of oil hadfloated past a boom streched across the bay, said officials.
U.S. Sen. Frank Murkowski, a champion of oil exploration inAlaska, asked that plans for drilling in Bristol Bay, the state'srichest fishing grounds, be set aside until the industry candemonstrate that it can respond effectively to spills.
``The Exxon Valdez accident has taught us that simply having aplan is not sufficient,'' the Alaska Republican said.