Mother Nature conspired against this struggling marathon Sunday, serving up balmy, windy weather and wilting both the men's and women's fields.
Temperatures during the Old Style/Chicago marathon hovered in the mid-60s, with 53% humidity.
Among the men, Paul Davies-Hale of England proved the most patient, winning in a rather pedestrian 2 hours 11 minutes 25 seconds, in his first marathon ever.
Among the women, Lisa Weidenbach of Issaquah, Wash., repeated as champion, with a personal best of 2:28:15, impressive under the circumstances.
It was the second-hottest race in Chicago history, only 1978 was worse.
The race conditions were simply more bad luck for the 12th running of Chicago's marathon, which has been fighting for respectability since losing its sponsor in 1986 and staging no race in 1987.
After a week of summer-like weather, race organizers hoped to be salvaged by a good race; to have, if not impressive times on this flat and fast course, at least a memorable race.
A pack of five men took off fast, maintaining a 2:09 pace at nine miles.
The lead pack went through the half-marathon at 1:04:50, a pace that would wither in the second half.
No one who was in the lead pack at the halfway point, with the exception of Montero, finished in the top five.
"I was concentrating on running five-minute miles," he said.
Davies-Hale caught the second pack at 13 miles and met up with pre-race favorite Steve Binns, who lives 30 miles from Davies-Hale in England's West Midlands.
Binns falling back (he eventually dropped out) and Davies-Hale moving up.
"I asked Binnsie who was in the first group, he told me, and I went," Davies-Hale said.
At 22 miles, Davies-Hale was in the lead and in control, running smoothly and not appearing to labor under the bright sun.
In the women's race, Weidenbach had not been the favorite and she agreed with that handicapping.
O'Brien, a 22-year-old from Boston, has been on the verge of a breakthrough for a long time.
She took off in Sunday's race with authority and ran with a 20-30-second cushion for 15 miles.
At 18 miles, Weidenbach came up on O'Brien, her New Balance teammate.
It was the same spot, the corner of Wells and North Avenue, that Weidenbach had taken the lead in last year's race.
Carla Beurskens of the Netherlands, at 37 still an amazing runner, eventually passed the struggling O'Brien and placed second 2:30:24.
Given the heat, the humidity and the wind, Weidenbach's time might have been as much as two minutes faster.
Davies-Hale, a former plumber from Rugeley, Straffordshire, seemed bemused by the attention and nonplussed that he had just won $50,000 in prize money.
Davies-Hale, 27, came to the United States in 1985 and settled in Boulder, Colo., the nation's unofficial running center.
Davies-Hale may have shown a liking for running in heat when he won the Boulder Bolder that year in terrific heat.
Still, Davies-Hale is unsure what his future in the marathon is.
"I've already had a great track season," Davies-Hale said.
"I may run another marathon next year .
Men's and women's winners won $50,000, second place won $30,000 and third place $20,000.
Scot Hellebuyck won the men's wheelchair race in 1:45:30.
Ann Cody Morris won the women's wheelchair race in 1:58:51.