The new year ushers in a new wildfireseason, an unwelcome thought to the residents of this small Montanatourist town on the northeastern corner of Yellowstone National Park.
For two months last summer the citizens of Cooke City and itstiny suburb, Silver Gate, were showcased on the nightly TV news andsplashed across the front pages of the nation's newspapers as forestfires threatened to burn them out.
Pinched between the Storm Creek and Clover-Mist blazes, anestimated 150 seasonal residents and dozens of tourists wereevacuated twice while hundreds of firefighters faced down walls offlame which threatened annihilation.
Their economically critical summer tourist season a bust and thehunting season crippled, the folks of Silver Gate and Cooke Citystraggled home in mid-September to pick up the pieces.
``The first thing most people around here did was go onvacation,'' said Patti Smith, owner with her husband, Bob, of theBearclaw Service and Cabins, a gas station and small motel.
``Business was way down this fall because we didn't have thehunters, but we got a lot of curious weekenders from Cody andBillings who wanted to see how bad it was.''
The Smiths, who own the only photocopy machine for 30 miles inevery direction, found their small gas station and convenience storea mecca during the fires.
The U.S. Forest Service, which coordinatedsome of its firefighting efforts from Cooke City, set up shop nearthe photocopy machine, and everybody who had information or wasseeking some crammed into the Smiths' log cabin office.
``It was crazy for a while,'' said Mrs. Smith, 33.
The second time the sirens went off and we hadto leave, my parents had just arrived from North Platte, Neb., so weall went to Red Lodge (Mont.), got nice motel rooms, and crashed.''
Winter now cloaks Cooke City and Silver Gate, and only about 70year-round residents remain to weather the below-zero months.
Theonly grocery store is on its winter schedule, open just Fridaythrough Monday, and many curio shops are shut up tight, but theBearclaw cabins and most of the other motels are open for wintersports enthusiasts.
It's snowmobiling season now, and clubs from as far away asCanada and Illinois are booked into Cooke City's motels to takeadvantage of the beautiful scenery and 80 miles of trails in thearea.
The state pays Bob Smith, 34, to groom the trails.
Patti Smith relishes the winter months because she gets caught upon chores, chats with her neighbors and watches videos.
The hottesttape in Cooke City this winter is ``Three Men and a Baby,'' forwhich
This winter, Mrs. Smith also has a newproject.
``I've got the whole story right here in this box,'' said theamateur historian.
Like nearly everybody else in Cooke City and Silver Gate, Mrs. Smith says she never wants to go through another summer like thelast one.
Nationwide, it was the second worst wildfire season since thegovernment started keeping records.
Because of the unprecedented fire season which burned nearly 1.5million acres in the greater Yellowstone ecosystem, including705,000 acres within the national park, Mrs. Smith and her friendsand neighbors worry about what's happening underneath the blanket ofsnow this winter.
wondered Mrs. Smith.
Rod Norum, a fire behavior analyst with the National ParkService, said he would not be surprised if pockets of fire are foundin the greater Yellowstone area come spring.
In his 18 years of studying wildfires, Norum has come acrossseveral incidents where wildfires buried themselves in the roots oftrees and grasses and smoldered all winter only to pop up throughthe snow in the spring.
When the snow melts in May, the Yellowstone country will providean answer to a question troubling lots of people whose lives werechanged by the wildfires of '88.