The City Council today asked countyprosecutors to investigate the conduct of a white policeman who wassecretly filmed while he pushed an off-duty black policeman througha plate-glass window.
district attorneyand head of the office's Special Investigations Division, will leadthe probe, said district attorney spokesman Andy Reynolds.
The black Hawthorne policeman, Sgt. Don Jackson, said he set upthe self-styled ``sting'' in Long Beach to expose alleged policeracism in the Los Angeles area.
An NBC-TV news camera crew arranged to follow Jackson during thesting Saturday night.
The incident was broadcast on NBC's nationalnews Monday night.
The police chief in Long Beach declined to comment pending aninvestigation.
``We will pursue it aggressively,'' said Long Beach City ManagerJames Hanklad.
Long Beach Mayor Ernie Kell said on NBC's ``Today'' show thismorning that he was disturbed by the videotape.
do not support racism or police brutality, nor do thevast majority of the citizens of Long Beach, and we're a caring,thinking community and it disturbed us very much to see the tape,''he said.
Long Beach, about 20 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, hasabout 450,000 people, including a sizeable black population.
The NBC-TV videotape shows a white officer attempting to searchJackson.
But Jackson's boss said the black officer was looking for trouble.
The 30-year-old Jackson, who has been on a stress-relateddisability leave from his Hawthorne job for 22 months, contends theincident is typical of a pattern of racism by white officers in theLos Angeles area.
Jackson alleges racist slurs and actions forced him from theHawthorne department.
He has a disability lawsuit pending, has filedracism complaints against the department and conducted a similarpersonal sting operation against Los Angeles police.
Jackson was riding as a passenger with Jeffrey Hill, a30-year-old off-duty state corrections officer, when they werepulled over allegedly for straddling lanes, which they denied.
Jackson got out after the car stopped and police approached.
During an argument, Long Beach Officer Mark Dickey orderedJackson to face a building and put his hands behind his head.
Police booked Jackson for investigation of interfering withpolice and challenging a police officer.
``The officer simply used violence,'' Jackson said Monday.
Jackson received support at a Monday night ceremony in LosAngeles commemorating King's birthday.
Jackson said he chose Long Beach police because of complaints tothe Police Misconduct Lawyer's Referral Service of Los Angeles.
David Lynn of the referral service said 50 misconduct complaintswere filed with his group against the Long Beach police.
Of those,27 were filed by minorities, and 24 of those involved confrontationswith white officers.