Introduction:U.S. military helicopters on Sunday located the wreckage of a plane that crashed last Monday with Texas congressman Mickey Leland and 15 others aboard.
U.S. rescue and recovery teams said that the plane hit a mountain about 4,300 feet above sea level, having missed clearing the peak by about 300 feet.
The crash site is about 75 miles east of the Fugnido refugee camp that Leland was flying to visit when the plane vanished in heavy weather last Monday.
Ackerman (D-N.Y.), a colleague of Leland's who has accompanied search crews for the last two days and was aboard the helicopter that first spotted the wreckage Sunday.
Ackerman said that the plane appeared to have hit "nose first, right into the rocks; its two wings sheared off, its engines melted, its fuselage gone."
Wreckage Examined Ackerman said that military paratroopers lowered themselves from his helicopter on ropes to examine the wreckage.
Also aboard the plane were Hugh Anderson Johnson Jr. and Patrice Yvonne Johnson, both aides to Leland (who were not related); Joyce Francine Williams, an aide to Rep. Ronald V.
Ivan Tillen, a New York businessman and friend of Leland's; Robert Woods, a political and economic officer at the American Embassy in Addis Ababa; Gladys Gilbert, a special projects officer for the mission of the U.S. Agency for International Development attached to the embassy; Thomas Worrick, the acting AID representative in Ethiopia, and Worrick's wife, Roberta.
Reaction to the news in the United States was one of sadness coupled with an outpouring of praise for Leland's work.
A statement issued by President Bush said that "Mickey Leland and the other members of his traveling party, both Americans and Ethiopians, were engaged in a noble cause -- trying to feed the hungry.
" Dellums spoke of his staff aide who lost her life in the crash as "a close personal friend for over a decade" and said that everyone on the plane "shared a common commitment to helping the poor, the starving and the dispossessed in that war-torn, drought-stricken land."
Discovery of the crash site ended what had been one of the most extensive American search and rescue operations ever conducted in a Third World country.
By Sunday, 18 aircraft, including four American helicopters, two American C-130 airplanes and 12 Ethiopian aircraft, were involved in the search.
Three more American helicopters were reported to be en route from Eglin Air Force Base in Florida when word of the discovery came.
Gilk said that the crash site, in a mountainous and heavily wooded region, is so remote and inaccessible that the nearest landing site for helicopters is half a mile away, a distance that he said could take as much as three hours to cover on foot.
Recovery Planned for Today Air Force personnel were assigned to remain near the site Sunday night to keep it secure.
Record arrived in Addis Ababa about 10 minutes after the first reports were received of the sighting of the crash site.
Stan Bloyer, said that the remains of the Americans will probably be returned to the United States through Torrejon Air Base near Madrid, where the American armed forces maintains full mortuary facilities.
Bill Emerson of Missouri and Jack Fields of Texas plan to fly to Addis Ababa to accompany the bodies back to the United States.
Discovery of the crash site came at about 1:15 p.m. local time Sunday.
Ackerman said that the helicopter he was traveling in set down during the morning at an airstrip near the village of Dembi Dolo.
There, the crew came upon a Roman Catholic missionary who told them that he had heard reports from local villagers that a plane had been heard nearby last week.
Presently, the crew found an Ethiopian surveyor who said he could guide them to an area near where the plane had been heard.
The surveyor was taken aboard, crew members said, but on their way toward their destination they spotted the crash site.
Mostly Rocks and Brush' Crew members described the site as "mostly rocks and brush" and indicated that the pilot of Leland's plane may have been trying to escape bad weather on Monday by following the pathway of a river flowing through a valley.
Rep. Alan Wheat (D-Mo.), who with Ackerman had been flying with search crews for the last two days, said he telephoned House Speaker Thomas S.
The crash site was described by U.S. authorities as being about 20 nautical miles due east of the town of Gambela and 230 nautical miles west-southwest of Addis Ababa.
The area of the site had apparently been searched within the first two days after the crash by American aircraft using electronic devices in an attempt to detect an emergency signal from the downed craft.
However, Sunday was the first day that helicopters flew over the area to make visual inspections.
Wheat, who was among those who had pressed Defense Department officials for the deployment of more aircraft in the search, said after the discovery Sunday: "We could have brought every plane in the world that we have, and it would not have made a difference."
President Bush, in his Sunday statement, said: "I have known, admired and worked with Mickey Leland for many years.
Our hearts go out to (his widow) and to the families and friends of the congressional staff members, State Department, Agency for International Development and Ethiopian officials who joined Mickey on his important mission and who died with him trying to carry it out." '
Best in Compassion' Foley said that "in his search to look into the plight of the world's most desperate and hungry individuals, Rep. Leland represented the best in compassion that we as a nation possess."
Baker also thanked Ethiopia, a Soviet-allied country with which Washington has had strained relations for several years, for its "outstanding support" in the search for Leland's party.
Bush offered U.S. help to the Ethiopian government for its investigation into the crash of the plane.