, the wave-washedbeach looks as if the worst oil spill in U.S. history had nevertouched it.
The pungent odor of petroleum wafts through the air as the holeturns black with crude oil, an oozing remnant of the 10.8 milliongallons spilled into Prince William Sound last March 24 by thetanker Exxon Valdez.
``Hundreds of gallons of oil are locked up under this beach,''he says.
``And this isn't isolated.
``The beaches can look beautiful at the surface, but you can digdown, in this case just a few inches below the surface, and findlots of oil.
Now, is that a threat or isn't it?''
A year after the wreck of the Exxon Valdez, the question clingslike the oil under this Perry Island beach.
But assessing the continuing damage wrought by the nation's mostextensive _ and expensive _ oil spill has just begun.
andgovernment agencies debate how to clean up what's left andscientists track wildlife populations' first steps on the long roadto recovery.
Any hope of a quick solution faded last summer as oil from theExxon Valdez spread across 1,100 miles of Alaska's wild southerncoast.
But when Exxon suspended its $2 billion cleanup inmid-September, it had recovered only 5 percent to 9 percent of theoil spilled, state officials estimate.
That leaves 50 percent to75 percent of the oil in the water, on the ocean bottom or onbeaches.
Workers found more than 1,000 dead otters, a sizable chunk ofthe spill area's total population of 15,000 to 22,000.
Many of Prince William Sound's 3,000 bald eagles also suffered;at least 151 died, most poisoned by scavenging the oily remains ofsome of the 34,400 dead seabirds recovered.
Those numbers alone make the Valdez spill the most lethal ever,but scientists say the actual death count is much higher,estimating that up to 90 percent of the seabirds caught in oil sankfrom sight or drifted out to sea.
Exxon notes the spill did not wipe out any species and sayssurviving animals and birds will rebuild populations.
But that maytake up to 70 years for some hard-hit seabird colonies, U.S. Fishand Wildlife Service researchers say.
``We never claimed that the spill put any animal on theendangered species list, but that's missing the point,'' said Fishand Wildlife spokesman Bruce Batten.
researchers havebeen told by lawyers to save their findings for court, where itseems nearly everyone involved in the spill is headed.
Exxon distributesbefore-and-after pictures of cleaned beaches; Bridgman and otherstate officials, accusing Exxon of ``myth-making,'' eagerly makeroom for journalists on flights to oiled beaches.
State officials cite an October survey that showed 117 miles ofshoreline remained moderately or heavily oiled, with oil more thantwo feet deep in some spots.
They say observers flying over thesound still report 15 to 20 oil sheens bleeding off beaches daily.
Exxon officials, meanwhile, say their winter monitoring of 64sites shows wind and waves have scoured away, on average, more thanhalf the surface oil left in September, and up to 80 percent of theburied oil.
``From a layman's point of view, what's left out there is reallyinsignificant,'' said Exxon scientist Andy Teal.