But the sun also happens to be about 400 times as far away from Earth asthe moon.
And when the moon's orbit happens to carry it directly across the faceof the sun, as it will Thursday, the effect is stunning -- a total solareclipse.
The phenomenon is justawe-inspiring."Solar eclipses occur twice a year, when the sun, moon andearth line up.
(This line-up would occur at every new moon, except that themoon's orbit is tilted so it only crosses the sun's path every six months.);
Because of variations in the moon's orbit, fewer than a third of the solareclipses are total eclipses.
In these cases the moon's shadow, up to 200 mileswide on the earth's surface, races west to east along the ground at 1,000 to5,000 miles per hour for a few thousand miles.
On average, any point on Earth is eclipsed justonce every 360 years.
But when the shadow's narrow path does crossinhabited areas, people flock there to experience "totality" -- to watch thelight snap off and the stars snap on, and to gaze at the sun's shaggy coronahanging in the dark sky for a few minutes before daylight abruptly returns.
In the United States, the opportunity has come twice in the past couple ofdecades -- along the East Coast in 1970 and across the Northwest and NorthernPlains in 1979.This Thursday the moon's shadow will be back for anotherperformance, one of the century's best.
Also, its 150-mile-wide path acrossHawaii, Baja California, Mexico City and four Central American capital cities"puts more people in the moon's shadow than any other eclipse in history,"says Alan Dyer, an editor of Astronomy magazine.
Finally, since the centerof the shadow will pass right across the world's largest cluster ofastronomical observatories, the audience will include several dozen solarscientists intent on getting the best view they've ever had."It's goingto be great from up there on the mountain," said Harold Zirin, a CaliforniaInstitute of Technology astronomer who will be at one of the observatoriesatop Mauna Kea, a dormant volcano that makes up a large piece of the island ofHawaii.
And in1919, astronomers spotted a star, which should have been behind the sun,instead peeking around the edge of the sun.
For one thing, chasing eclipses by trekking to remoteregions with delicate astronomical instruments to capture a few minutes ofdata has lost much of its glamour, especially in times of tight budgets.
For another, some of the information now can be gathered any day of the yearby using instruments that simulate a solar eclipse.
And, unlike mostpeople headed for Hawaii, astronomers will be packing long underwear and downjackets in case, as sometimes happens even in July, the temperature at thesummit drops below freezing.7 observatories in useSeven of the nineobservatories atop Mauna Kea will be used Thursday morning.
(The KeckObservatory, being built by the University of California and the CaliforniaInstitute of Technology, is behind its original construction schedule and willnot be completed in time for the eclipse.)What they want to know is moreabout the temperature and composition of the sun's upper atmosphere -- layerscalled the chromosphere and the corona -- which normally is difficult toexamine against the glare of the sun.
Solar wind studiesAt some observatories, astronomers will take repeatedphotographs of the corona during the eclipse to study it close up and to watchfor material accelerating outward to become solar wind.
They'll be fighting thetemptation to abandon their instruments and go outside to watch."Thebiggest problem," Zirin said, "is whether we're going to see the eclipse."