Introduction:   Britain and France were linked beneath theEnglish Channel on Tuesday when workers used a two-inch probe toconnect two halves of a 31-mile undersea rail tunnel, officialsreported.
Management sources at TransManche Link, the constructionconsortium building the ``Chunnel'' - the Channel Tunnel
-confirmed the historic linkup occurred about 8:25 p.m. when Britishworkers sent the probe through to French colleagues.
``It is an example of what Europe is about,'' British PrimeMinister Margaret Thatcher said in London.
The linkup fulfills a dream by Napoleon in 1802, who thought hecould defeat the English by connecting Britain to Europe with aland passage.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' said a construction unionofficial.
The basic goal of the Channel Tunnel project is to enablepassengers to travel between London and Paris in about three hours.
The threading of the probes through 100 yards of chalk under theEnglish Channel marks a major turning point in three years ofdrilling on the world's costliest tunnel.
The meeting point was just over 13{ miles southeast ofShakespeare Cliff, the British terminus near the town of Dover, and10 miles northwest of the French town of Sangatte, near Calais.
French workers reaching the tiny hole telephoned their Britishcounterparts and relayed the news to TransManche officials.
It's the first time we have airpassing between the two tunnels,'' said Gordon Crighton, tunnelengineering manager.
Another day will be needed to be certain, technicianssaid, but they called the line-up ``exceptional,'' considering themassive boring machines are drilling holes about three storieshigh.
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole to permit passagefrom one half to the other.
Two Japanese-designed boring machines are drilling the tunnel.
The other will drill its own grave and be buried in cementbecause French officials said it will be too costly to extricateit.
But TransManche officials said earlier Tuesday that the meetingin the middle would occur on schedule.
Taking into account all the tunnels, 80 percent of the drillinghas been completed by giant, Japanese-built boring machines workingfrom Calais and Folkstone, England.
Tuesday's linkup in the service tunnel is described by theFrench as a ``mouse ole'' - a bore only two inches in diameter.
Eurotunnel PLC, the world's largest engineering project,announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreement with its banks on$3.5
Officials estimate the tunnel may carry 28 million passengers inthe first year of operation, although Eurotunnel doesn't expect aprofit until the end of the century.
A study released last Friday in Paris by transportation expertssaid the tunnel's completion will aggravate traffic congestion in awide area of continental Europe.
Since construction began in late 1987, there have been sevendeaths on the British side and two on the French.
The undersea bond between the two hereditary enemies wasenvisioned nearly 200 years ago by a French engineer called AlbertMathieu.
Tunneling actually started in subsequent efforts in 1882 and 1974,but were abandoned.