Moredisaster relief aid went there than to any other state.
The thirdstory in a four-part series, ``Cashing In on the Drought,''examines how the $3.9 billion disaster aid program helped farmersmost in need.
The 1988 drought relief program poured more than $400 millioninto North Dakota, the nation's most agriculturally dependentstate.
The money not only helped rescue thousands of farmers; manysay it also kept the state afloat.
``If it hadn't been for drought aid,the economic situation all through North Dakota would have beendisastrous.
``I don't think too many farmers took disaster aid and boughtCadillacs and went on vacation in my area,'' Grindberg added.
A study of the $3.9 billion disaster relief program, conductedby The Associated Press over seven months, found that outside theMidwest drought area, lax rules and requirements led to thousandsof farmers collecting millions of dollars for nothing more seriousthan the normal trials of nature.
But money did reach areas Congress most intended to aid,including North Dakota, where it kept some farmers on their landand may have prevented some business closures.
``You might say it kept the state alive,'' said Fred Selberg,another farmer in this Red River Valley county.
North Dakota, where the drought evoked memories of Dust
The state, the No. 1 producer of hard-red spring wheat, losttwo-thirds of its 1988 crop; millions of normally golden acreswithered to pathetic rows of shriveled brown stumps.
But droughtaid cut farmers' losses from $1.1 billion to $706 million, a NorthDakota State University study found.
Disaster payments reduced statewide losses to businesses, banksand households from $3.4 billion to $2.1 billion, the study said.
Another university survey of 466 farmers said that withoutdrought aid, the average farmer's net cash income would have beenjust $6,300.
Disaster aid and crop insurance also were critical to otherdrought-ravaged states, including Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota andWisconsin.
Disaster aid and crop insurance pumped about $500 million intoIowa's economy, an Iowa State University study said.
``There was no question it was needed to stave off a major newwave of bankruptcies and financial problems among Corn Beltproducers,'' said Mark Edelman, a university economist.
``Even the drought assistance for most farmers fell well shortof bringing what their income would be with normal yields, but itprovided a safety net,'' he said.
It was the same in North Dakota, which has struggled with anexodus of young, educated people, declining revenues, fading smalltowns and the loss of nearly a fifth of its farms this decade.
Good crops the next two years started to reverse thetrend, but drought stalled the recovery.
``It has a demoralizing effect when you have a disaster,'' saidDwight Aakre, a North Dakota State economist.
The last thing North Dakota needed is morenegatives to push us down.''
Despite relief and nearly $200 million in crop insurance, thestate still needs ``a good year to get back on our feet,'' Haucksaid.
``We didn't get that in '89,'' he added, referring tocontinuing drought in North Dakota's west and south-centralsections.
In fact, while crops statewide are in better shape than 12months ago, dollar losses will exceed 1988's estimated $530million, Aakre said.
Two reasons why: more acres of wheat wereplanted this year, and farmers don't have grain reserves to sell athigh prices as they did in 1988 to ease their burden.
About $19.8 million in 1988 aid was divvied up among 1,847 farmsin Cass County, the state's leader in crop acres.
For Larry Richard, a 36-year-old father of three who farms 1,000acres near the town of Horace,
$39,000 in aid, even coupled with$55,000 in crop insurance, amounted to ``just enough to break even.
``You throw a lot of expenses way ahead of what your crop isgoing to be,'' he said.
Schulz, who farms 6,000 acres, said that without his $100,000maximum payment he might have been forced to sell equipment or layoff help.
Along with crop insurance and the sale of grain reserves, hesaid, ``I was able to mark time in '88.
Grindberg, who farms 900 acres of wheat, soybeans and barley,was in the red last year despite $70,000 in aid and insurance.
His1989 crop was better but still below normal; he expects to get only$3,000 in relief payments.
Grindberg, a 40-year farming veteran who also delivers mailpart-time, thinks the government last year ``pushed he panic buttonon this disaster thing and went too far.
``Disaster aid is political,'' he said.