Introduction:Opponents of any sort of gun control write passionately,but, judging from their letters ("Smile When You Say GunControl," Jan. 14)
For example, one letter writer, commenting on my Dec. 12Counterpoint, "Gun Control Is Constitutional," felt compelledto instruct me that the word militia means "the wholepeople," a point I quoted three times and also paraphrasedonce in my brief article.
He and the others who dwelt on thispoint also don't read the Second Amendment very well.
That same correspondent accused me of calling for "removalof all guns from American citizens through the implementationof total regulations.
I said thatalthough the Second Amendment has nothing to do with privateuses of arms
We have many rights not enumerated in the Constitution,such as the right to marry, drive a car or own a dog.
In the same way, the right to own a gun is not disparagedby being licensed or otherwise regulated and controlled.
Oneletter writer who also knows something about theConstitution, though disagreeing with me on another point,agreed on the central issue, that regulation of gun ownershipand use does not violate the Constitution.
All the letters missed entirely my point about requiringgun owners to "sign up" with (not "join") the National Guard.
Requiring gunowners to register with the National Guard would provide thekind of scrutiny the Brady and Staggers bills contemplated,and, if Congress dared, could provide an additional measureof control over who owns what kinds of weapons.
But my main point was to show how far Congress can go ingun-control legislation without exceeding its constitutionalpowers, using as a model the legislation of the SecondCongress, which included most of the authors of the SecondAmendment.
Another letter writer thinks I have confused the issue bycalling the duty to serve in the militia a right to serve,but if he will look at the debates in the First Congress hewill see that there is no confusion at all, that the authorsof the Second Amendment were talking about the right toserve.
The real issue is that the Second Amendment addressed aserious public concern, to protect the right of citizens toserve as defenders of the community in times of peril, notthe personal uses of guns.