Introduction:   Mexico, where sun worship has passed fromancient civilizations to modern beachgoers, is gearing up early forthe day next year when the sun will be blotted out.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has appointed aCabinet-level commission to prepare for what astronomers bill as``the slar eclipse of the century'' on July 11.
Posters have beenplaced in Mexico City subways promoting the event, and resortsalong the eclipse's path are scrambling to accommodate the expectedrush of tourists.
``It's the most important eclipse in history,'' says Miguel GilGuzman, secretary-general of the Mexican Astronomical Society.
This one will cut a swath across one of the most populousregions of the globe, turning day to night for an estimated 50million residents in 14 of Mexico's 31 states.
On July 11, the moon will pass between the planet and the sun,abruptly swallowing midday's light, except for a weird glow on thehorizon.
The commission bills the northwestern state of Baja CaliforniaSur as the best place to watch because the state has an average of300 cloudless days a year.
California Sur alone plans to spend $26.5 million forpublic safety for eclipse enthusiasts but banks on raking inmillions more from tourism.
For three years, scientists and astronomy buffs have beenstaking out turf in Mexico.
Most hotels along the eclipse route are full for July 11.Tourism officials are seeking private homes and campgrounds,schools and auditoriums to house the influx.
California Sur's tourist facilities can only handle 120,000visitors, and 90 percent of that capacity is booked, tourismdirector Rodolfo Palacios says.
The state says at least four ships will pressed into service asfloating hotels.
Cuernavaca, 35 miles south of Mexico City, is hosting ageophysicists' congress during the week of the eclipse.
At least one expedition plans to view the show from the17,887-foot Popocapetl volcano, the country's second-highest peak.
Rosy rays of light will shoot out around the moon's edges,forming what astronomers call a corona, or crown.
The National University is developing six half-hourdocumentaries on eclipses and 10 TV spots on the dangers of lookingat the sun, astronomy professor Jesus Galindo says.
The government plans to supervise the production of speciallenses for viewing an eclipse.