A hurricane ended the dream of a railroad down the Florida Keys in1935 and virtually isolated Key West for two years.
Nine years earlier, a "BigOne" had stopped Miami's first real-estate boom in its tracks, pushingfloodwaters inland to the new jai alai fronton near where Miami InternationalAirport sits today.
What would one of those legendarystorms of the past with 200 mph winds pushing huge tidal surges do to thislow-lying metropolis on the Atlantic?
From now until the end of the season, the six hurricane specialists willmonitor weather computers 24 hours a day.
When a disturbance becomes threatening, a speciallyequipped plane is sent into the storm's heart to measure barometric pressure,wind speed and temperature.
One of the specialists, Lixion Avila, hasbegun counting tropical waves that form off the coast of Africa
About 20 of them intensify into stronger disturbances, ranging fromtropical depressions, with wind speeds to 38 mph; to tropical storms, withwinds from 39 to 73 mph; to hurricanes, with winds exceeding 74 mph.
Lastyear, 16 tropical depressions developed in the Atlantic.
People who venture into such dubious endeavors as long-term hurricaneforecasting said this could be another light year.
One such year was 1935-- only six hurricanes formed, but one was the strongest to hit the continent.
More than 800 workers, brought down to build the Overseas Highway through theFlorida Keys, were killed when 200 mph winds knocked their evacuation trainoff the tracks.
NO MATTER what long-range forecasters say, scientists atthe Hurricane Center know that the laws of probability are closing in onMiami.
Miami has grown immensely since the last major storm and is greatlyoverdue, they said."Historically, south Florida has had more hurricanesthan any other site," said Jerry Jarrell, a hurricane specialist eyeingMiami's 27-year hiatus nervously.
"We would expect a major hurricane to hitwithin 75 miles of Miami every eight years."At the center, scientistsbuilt a computer model to calculate what would happen if the 1926 hurricanewere to hit Miami today.
That storm was almost exactly the strength ofHurricane Hugo, which hit in South Carolina with 135 mph winds in September1989.
The scientists took data from Hugo and applied it to the path taken bythe 1926 hurricane into Miami."It would be a totally different storyhere," said Max Mayfield, who collected photos from the 1926 storm toillustrate the model.
I think all these folks in their MiamiBeach condos are going to be in for a rude awakening."A worst-case storm,with winds topping 150 mph, would put 5 feet of water in Joe's Stone Crabsrestaurant, a Miami Beach landmark, and 9 feet of water on Biscayne Boulevardin downtown Miami.
Surging water could reach levels of 13 1/2 feet inlow-lying areas south of Miami.
This, and the numberof years since the last major storm hit, has spawned a certain complacencyamong residents that the specialists find disturbing.