Introduction:   John Hatch, founder of the non-profit Foundationfor International Community Assistance, promotes village banking toencourage private enterprise in the Third World.
What he foreseesis a body blow to world poverty through bootstrap economics.
John Hatch says he hit upon his Third World``poverty vaccination'' while panic-stricken on a flight to Bolivia.
What he had stumbled upon was village banking, a system ofinvestment using small revolving loans to poor women to financetheir private enterprise, allowing them to create savings whilepaying interest and qualifying for bigger loans.
The series of loans, starting at $50, is renewable over threeyears to a ceiling of $300, allowing recipients to reach a level atwhich they can qualify for commercial credit.
What Hatch envisioned on that plane five years ago hastranslated into 400 village banks in nine countries with more than35,000 members.
What Hatch foresees is a body blow to world poverty throughbootstrap economics.
Hatch, a one-time Peace Corps volunteer with a doctorate ineconomic development, is founder and president of the non-profitFoundation for International Community Assistance, which recentlymoved its headquarters from Tucson to Alexandria, Va. He says its impetus was, and remains, the thousands of childrenworldwide who die daily because of starvation, what he calls thesacrifice of ``probably our most precious resource.''
There is ``almost a 100 percent guarantee'' that increasedincome for women will go into improvements in their children'swelfare, Hatch says.
``We teach severely poor mothers how to create their ownself-managed bank, which provides them with self-employment loans,provides them with savings incentives and provides them with asupport group of mothers like themselves, so that they are allattacking change at the same time.''
says,``John Hatch is close to the voice of the poor.
Catholic Relief Services entered a five-year, $1 million jointventure a year ago with the U.S. Agency for InternationalDevelopment and the foundation to create 40 village banks inThailand.
They targeted microenterprise development through smallentrepreneurs, vendors, village market women, who in somedeveloping countries comprise up to 50 percent of the employment.
Beryl Rupp, a Rotary Club official in Phoenix, says the bankmembers buy necessities with their profits or savings: a chair tosit on, pots to cook in, blankets, better food.
Their vehicle for improvement is the village bank, eachcomprised of 30 to 50 women who, through loans starting at $50, canearn enough to provide savings and create capital.
Hatch says theloans give them freedom to start their own investment projects inor near home.
The foundation will go into a village with a joint-venturepartner that puts up at least half of the capitalization, such asRotary Clubs or Catholic Relief Services, and identify a key woman.
At the meeting, the women circle illustrated examples ofquick-turnover work they want the loans to finance.
Each woman signs her name or provides a thumbprint ascollateral, agreeing to repay one-sixteenth of the loan weekly,plus interest of 1 percent to 3 percent, in line with local banks.
Overall, the average is 97 percent, says Hatch.
we start out,'' says Hatch.
Women who join the bank screen members and elect their leadersfrom first-meeting attendees.
But at the same time, each woman has been depositing weekly savingsof at least 20 percent of the original loan.
The savings serve asincentive for subsequent loans by increasing the credit line eachtime, Hatch said.
Interest in village banking is mounting.
The United Nations has provided a $50,000 grant to research theeffects of women's empowerment through village banking on maternaland child health practices.
Hatch says he believes village banking has a role to play inreducing poverty along the Mexican border and in slowing downmigration to this country.