House Speaker Tom Foley charges that most of the supportfor the term limit proposal in Washington state came from"extreme right-wing activists."
Ron Brown, chairman of theDemocratic National Committee, says "term limits are abackhanded attempt by Republicans to get rid of Democratsthey can't defeat at the polls."
While it's true themost visible term limit advocates are right of center, themovement is picking up many prominent liberal and Democraticsupporters.
Certainly the polls show that term limits areoverwhelmingly popular with Americans regardless of income,party, race or sex.
Last month's Wall Street Journal/NBC Newspoll showed Americans back term limits by 75% to 21%nationwide.
Women favored term limits more thanmen.
Martin Plissner, political director for CBS News, sayshe has "never seen an issue on which there was so littledemographic variation."One reason is that term limits would open up politics tomany people now excluded from office by career incumbents.
Most ofthe authors of Washington state's term limit are liberalDemocrats who want to break up "the old-boy network."
One ofthe authors, Sherry Bockwinkel, says "You won't see whiteincumbents hanging on to districts that long ago becamelargely minority.""Incumbency is the glass ceiling of American politics,"says Kay Slaughter, the Democratic candidate in a specialU.S. House election in Virginia yesterday.
She thinks termlimits will give women more opportunities in politics; herGOP opponent refused to support federal term limits.
ColoradoRep. Ben Nighthorse Campbell, the only American Indian inCongress, backed a term limit measure last year thatrestricted his own tenure.
Term limits for Congress have been supported by some ofhistory's most prominent Democrats.
Term limits are a castor oil that democracy needs totake," he says.
Last year, as head of the CaliforniaDemocratic Party he refused to sign a party slate maileragainst term limits.
It'stime more candidates thought of politics as a calling insteadof a career."Mr. Brown says arguments that legislative staff and theunelected bureaucracy would gain power under term limits aresimply proof that "we must curb the excessive power of thosepolitical players as well."
Other former Democratic governors who favor term limitsinclude Vermont's Madeleine Kunin and Colorado's RichardLamm."Breaking the gridlock of incumbency could throw the doorsopen to new people and new ideas that would make politicsrewarding, meaningful and fun," says Ms. Kunin.
"Term limits haveflaws, but they will provide badly needed competition."While many prominent Democrats support term limits, party"apparatchiks" are dead set against them.
Intimidation like that has slowed support for term limitsamong Democratic officeholders, but there are exceptions.
InMassachusetts, the state's Democratic attorney general andsecretary of state both favor term limits.
In Texas, Gov. AnnRichards says she "would be glad" to sign a bill limitingcongressional and legislative terms.
The liberal Seattle Times,Washington state's largest newspaper, stunned its readers byendorsing term limits.
Last month,the station made a highly unusual about-face and endorsedterm limits for Congress: "We're not going to get{leadership} till we have a massive infusion of new blood."Among Democratic Party activists, James Calaway of Texasis typical of those who now favor term limits.
He says termlimits would mean "we're governed by citizens who go homeafter their service and not permanent, elitist people whonever leave office."
Neo-liberals, who believe that centralized bureaucraciesare the biggest obstacle to reforming government, are alsowarming to term limits.
"People who say term limits are aRepublican plot to oust incumbents should know that amajority of open seats are won by Democrats," says Rep. AndyJacobs of Indiana.
Indeed, the Democratic Party couldactually be helped by term limits, according to formerOklahoma state legislator Cleta Mitchell, a self-described"liberal feminist" who works with the Denver-based term limitgroup Americans Back in Charge.
"Democrats must offer votersmore than the simple powers of incumbency," she says.
"Solong as our party is dominated by cynical veterans it willturn off the young people who are our party's future."No one suggests the drive to enact term limits will beeasy -- especially in states that ban voter initiatives.