Introduction:   Thousands of peoleprayed, cheered, danced, beat drums and observed other traditionstoday as a total eclipse of the sun darkened a wide area ofIndonesia and the southern Philippines.
The sun was blacked out by the shadow of the moon for up to fourminutes along a 108-mile swath that moved from the Indian Oceanacross Indonesia and the southern Philippine island of Mindanao.
A partial eclipse was visible across a wide area of Asia as farwest as India _ including Southeast Asia, China, Japan and NewGuinea as well as parts of Australia and the Pacific islands.
Clouds obscured the solar spectacular in Jakarta, Indonesia,Hong Kong and in the eastern Mindanao city of Davao, wherethousands of tourists and scientists had gathered to observe theeclipse.
about 650miles southeast of Manila despite early scattered clouds.
Richard Fisher of the High Altitude Observatory in Boulder,Colo., said that despite scattered clouds, scientists wereconfident they had taken useful pictures of the eclipse.
In Jakarta, Wilson Sinambela of the National Institute ofAeronautics said a total eclipse was observed in several parts ofthe country, including by about 1,000 tourists in the South Sumatracapital Palembang.
He said thousands of Indonesians prayed and beat drums to heraldthe start of the eclipse, which began in southwestern Sumatrabefore heading on to the Philippines.
Clouds blocked the first moments of the eclipse in GeneralSantos City.
But the cloud cover broke, setting off wild cheeringamong the thousands who watched the phenomenon in a scorchingtropical heat.
In Baguio City, 130 miles north of Manila, pregnant women of thelocal Ilocano community rinsed their hair during the eclipse withwater dripped from burned rice straws in a traditional ritual.
Officials said about 20,000 tourists and scientists from aroundthe world had come to the southern Philippines to watch theeclipse, the last one expected here for at least 50 years.
Scientists said the area afforded the best opportunity towitness and study the eclipse because skies are usually clear thistime of year.
But in Davao City, 60 miles to the northeast, morning cloudssent hundreds scurrying to the airport for flights to GeneralSantos.
Church bells in Davao tolled while police and civilians set offfirecrackers and fired weapons in the air to mark the eclipse.
In Manila, thousands turned out under clear skies to see thepartial eclipse that blocked about 75 percent of the sun's surfaceat its height.