A poor ventilation system that does little more thanrecycle old, stale air from one end of the building to another.
Millions ofAmerican office workers are getting more than they bargained for when theyinhale in a building that has no fresh air.
That'sbecause, in today's modern office buildings, recirculated air can meanrecycled flu and other airborne infections.
The evidence comes from variousstudies of tuberculosis, measles and flu that spread in a manner that can onlybe explained by poor air ventilation."Modern office buildings are tight,"says Jon Rosenberg, public health officer in California's occupational healthprogram.
saythe problem is not the same as "sick building syndrome" -- a situation inwhich workers are exposed chronically to toxic chemicals and gases emittedfrom carpets, furniture and other building materials.
Nor is it to blame forlast month's outbreak in Richmond of Legionnaire's disease -- an illnesscaused by a bug linked to wet, damp spaces rather than poor ventilation.
People are the source," says Dr. Edward Nardell, who studiesairborne infections for the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
"Verybad ventilation makes the system worse."In a study published in the Augustissue of the American Review of Respiratory Diseases, Nardell and colleaguesat Harvard Medical School found that an outbreak of tuberculosis documented inone unidentified government building could have been cut in half had theventilation been better.
The study found that 40 percent of the building'sworkers -- or 27 of 47 -- were infected with tuberculosis from one 30-year-oldsick employee.
The infection rate was as high in some distant parts of thebuilding as it was next to the sick employee."By recirculating the air,you spread it throughout the building," says Nardell.
"People who had nodirect contact with this case, might have been exposed in far reaches of thebuilding."If tuberculosis can spread in poorly ventilated buildings, socan other infectious bugs.
Respiratory infection experts say that flu virusesand measles are easier to spread than TB."This particular study deals onlywith TB," says Dr. Jonathan Samet, a respiratory-disease expert at theUniversity of New Mexico, "but the observations may apply to other organisms,such as the respiratory viruses that cause flu."Building workers hadcomplained for years about poor air quality.
In the study, Nardell estimated that if outdoor airventilation in the government building had been doubled -- to about 35 cubicfeet per minute, a level that Massachusetts recommends for buildings wheresmoking is permitted -- only half as many workers would have been infectedwith tuberculosis.
Other studies have documented:;   (check) Flu spreadsquickly on airplanes where ventilation systems consist entirely ofrecirculated air.(check)
Tuberculosis can spread in homelessshelters, prisons and hospitals where ventilation is poor.
"It may survive several hours in dry air," says VernonKnight, a respiratory virus disease expert at Baylor College of Medicine inHouston.
"In those tight buildings, they continue to recirculate it, and theyprobably build up."Nardell and others recognize that the solution to thisproblem -- fixing or replacing ventilation systems to include more fresh air-- can be expensive.
In his tuberculosis study, hefound that the biggest benefit comes from improving the worst ventilationsystems that allow very little fresh air.
illness."There's only so much you can do," Nardell says."There's going to be a price of living together in a communal society."YOU'RE INTERESTEDEmployees who think that poor air quality at their workplaceis contributing to health problems can call Cal-OSHA, a state agency thatmonitors worker safety and health.