Here is a chronology of the Exxon Valdez oil spill, its cleanupand related developments:   March 24: The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez runs aground on BlighReef some 25 miles south of Valdez, Alaska, spilling nearly 11million gallons of North Slope crude oil into Prince William Sound.
March 30: Exxon fires tanker captain Joseph Hazelwood aftertests reveal he was legally drunk 10 hours after the accident.
Oil now covers 1,000square miles, leaking out of the sound to foul beaches along theGulf of Alaska and Cook Inlet.
Exxon and other big oil companies announce plans for avoluntary network of response teams capable of handling big spillsanywhere in U.S. coastal waters.
15: Exxon suspends its beach cleanup for the winter,claiming it has left 1,100 miles of oiled beaches ``environmentallystable'' and saying its 25-week cleanup involving more than 10,000workers was a job well done.
Alaska officials disagree and announcetheir own $21 million winter cleanup plan.
Oct. 27: The National Wildlife Federation says Exxon hasresigned from its corporate advisory board.
Exxon calls theconservation group unfair in its criticism of the oil spill; thegroup calls Exxon ``a corporate pariah.''
Nov. 8: The U.S. House of Representatives passes a billpreserving states' ability to adopt stricter oil spill liabilitylaws than the federal government.
Dec. 31: Wildlife officials report that more than 1,000 seaotters, 140 bald eagles and nearly 36,500 seabirds have been founddead in the spill area.
The Alaska Oil Spill Commission issues a report callingfor an overhaul of the nation's oil transportation system.
Itblames the Valdez spill in part on the Coast Guard's ``undulyfriendly relationship with industry,'' and a reckless rush toprofits by the oil industry.
Jan. 22: Hazelwood goes on trial in Anchorage, facing charges ofcriminal mischief, reckless endangerment, negligent discharge ofoil, and operating a vessel while intoxicated.
The Coast Guard orders Exxon to resume its cleanup May1 and to submit a plan by March 15.
A federal grand jury indicts Exxon and its shippingsubsidiary on five criminal counts.
March 21 _ Hazelwood case submitted to jury.
_ Jury finds Hazelwood guilty of negligent discharge ofoil but innocent of the more serious charges.