Introduction: Canadians were shamed, angry and saddened Tuesdaythat national hero Ben Johnson was stripped of his Olympic goldmedal for using drugs to enhance his performance.
``I feel terribly sad for him,'' said Fergus Kilmartin, 36, ofCoquitlam, British Colombia.
He hasn't got the guile to do that.''
A disappointed nation awaited the return of the sprinter after aurine sample was found to contain traces of anabolic steroids.
Canada's sole gold medal went to American Carl Lewis, who finishedsecond in the 100-meter dash.
Sports Minister Jean Charest, who called the incident ``anational embarrassment,'' said Johnson will be banned from Canada'snational team for life.
But Johnson's family was left confused and outraged by the turnof events.
``My brother is not guilty,'' a distaught Rodney told reportersin her yard in the Toronto suburb of Rexdale.
``If you could cuthim into a million pieces and test him over again _ my brother isnot on drugs.''
Throughout Monday evening, local childrenattempted to raise a chorus of ``Ben!
only to give upwhen the crowd would not respond.
``We've just seen the destruction of a role model,'' said formerdownhill skier Ken Read, of Calgary, now Canada's representative onthe International Olympic Committee's athletics commission.
It was the second shock to national sports fans in recentmonths.
In August, fans were outraged when hockey legend WayneGretzky, another national hero, was traded from the Edmonton Oilersto the Los Angeles Kings.
Canadian speedskater Gaetan Boucher judged the sprinter harshly,saying he has ``no respect'' for an athlete who takes drugs.
Boucher won two gold medals at the 1984 Winter Games in Sarajevo,Yugoslavia.
``From time to time people would come to me in a private way _ and this happened one or two times ... that maybe Ben Johnson isusing steroids or other drugs,'' he said.
Charest said he didn't press Johnson to have a drug test becausehe thought the sprinter was aware that medal winners at theOlympics would be tested for drugs immediately followingcompetition.
``Everybody knew in advance that Mr. Johnson, if he wins amedal, was going to be tested,'' said Charest.
