``I was concerned because they said an aunt of mine had it and Ijust wanted to come for the checkup.
All of our family is going togo through the program to make sure that if we have it that we'll dosomething about it.''
Hispanics are three times as likely to developdiabetes as the general population, and 40 percent of the 700,000victims in Texas are Mexican-American.
More than 150,000 Americans die from diabetes each year; another150,000 deaths are diabetes-related, according to the AmericanDiabetes Association.
No one really knows what sparks it, but researchers believeHispanics could hold the key.
Researchers take a customized mobile home to neighborhoods torandomly check Hispanics and Anglos for the disease, which deprivesthe body of insulin and can lead to complications affecting theheart, kidneys, eyes and nerves.
An epidemiologist at the center, Dr. Michael Stern, has devoted10 years to studying Hispanic diabetes and led the grassroots studyof Type II diabetes.
Type II, the most common form, develops mostly in obese adultsover 40 who also may have a family history of the disease.
In obesediabetics, the body has too much insulin because it is burning morefats than sugars.
Type I diabetes usually develops among adolescents and requiresthat they have daily injections of insulin.
Stern believes if people exercised more and ate less of thefat-saturated foods common to the diets of low-income Hispanics,fewer would get the disease.
``We don't know why, when they get diabetes, they have a moresevere form of the disease _ whether it's a biological difference oris it that they are not getting as good medical care.
The study is in its follow-up stage, to see if diagnosed diabetespatients have changed their lifestyle and have sought medical care.
Teresa Castro, 54, whose diabetic husband died at age 37, wentthrough the screening eight years ago.
Doctors put her on a strict, low-fat diet and she lost 26pounds.
``I went to the screening because they called and said it wasfree.
That's why I went to it, because being poor I couldn't affordto go to the doctor for this type of checkup,'' she said.
``I feel OK, but they tell me that one year you can be OK and thenext year, it can be totally different.''
DeFronzo, who in 1988 was chosen the top diabetes investigator byCanadian and Japanese diabetes associations, says his unit at theHealth Science Center will try to use many of Stern's patients forresearch.
That will include work for Lipha Chemicals, which makes ananti-diabetic drug called metaforim that improves the body's abilityto respond to insulin.
Educating elementary-school-age children about healthy dietswould help reduce the number of diabetes cases, DeFronzo said.
``So you have to design an exercise program that is compatiblewith the patient's lifestyle and it is something they can do.
