Term limits do not add another "qualification" forservice in Congress.
They do not prevent anyone from havingan opportunity to serve in Congress.
They merely prevent aperson who has already served a certain number of consecutiveterms in office from serving another consecutive term.
State statutes that bar first-time candidates from runningfor Congress have been held to add to the qualifications setforth in the Constitution and have been invalidated.
But state statutes that simply limit thetenure of existing congressional officeholders have not yetbeen tested in court.
The constitutionality of such state term limits may,however, be tested next month.
Florida's attorney general hasasked its state Supreme Court for an advisory opinion on aterm-limit initiative that would limit the state's members ofCongress to eight consecutive years in office.
Three U.S.House members, led by Democrat Larry Smith, have filed briefsasking the court to rule state term limits unconstitutional.
The court will hear arguments Friday, and may rule later thismonth.
Nevertheless, the California decision demolished many ofthe legal arguments made by incumbents.
They argued that voters were denied theright to be represented by the same legislator indefinitely,and that term limits discriminated against incumbents anddenied them their right to equal protection of the laws.
Therefore,they do not deprive voters of the freedom to associate withcandidates based on their viewpoint or with any particularparty.
Rather, they prevent citizens from voting for aparticular candidate after he has served in office a setnumber of years.
They may vote for that candidate again aftera "waiting period" has ended.
The restriction is imposed in anon-discriminatory manner on all candidates regardless ofviewpoint or party affiliation.
In its 1972 decision Bullock v. Carter and again in its1982 decision Clements v. Fashing, the U.S. Supreme Courtdetermined that a particular candidate has no "fundamental"right to ballot access or to run for office.
Federal courtshave upheld many state restrictions on who may qualify forballot access.
They have never held reasonable,non-discriminatory restrictions on who may run a violation ofthe right to vote.
The Supreme Court has foundthat clause violated only in those cases where ballot accessrestrictions discriminate against the poor and against new,small or independent party candidates.
Unlike the age, residency and citizenship requirements,term limits do not prevent any non-incumbent from running forCongress.
Nor do they prevent a House member who has reacheda term limit from running for the U.S. Senate or vice versa.
Nor do they limit an incumbent who leaves office for a periodof time (six years in Washington state) from running again.
Consequently, the argument that term limits are"qualifications" just like those already in the Constitution-- and that therefore they can be added only by amending theConstitution -- isn't particularly convincing.
Viewed in thisway, term limits imposed by states would be constitutional.
Brown, the Supreme Court upheld a California law thatprohibited an independent candidate from running for Congressbecause he had changed his registration to Independent lessthan 11 months before the election.
In explaining that interest, the court recognized that"there must be a substantial regulation of elections {by thestates} if they are to be fair and honest," and if some sortof order is to accompany the democratic process.
Thecourt has not defined what it means by "extraordinarydefects," but surely the fact that 98% of House incumbentsare routinely re-elected and that one out of five incumbentsran with no major-party opposition in 1990 might qualify.
Presumably, if an incumbent were trulyeffective and popular he wouldn't find that a crushingobstacle.
Incumbents would certainly havethe resources to educate voters in write-in procedures.
