Introduction: Coast Guard Commandant Paul A. Yost onTuesday attacked Exxon's plan to clean up the Alaskan oil spill.
Consumers, politicians and environmentalists expressed their angerin a one-day ``Boycott Exxon'' campaign.
In Washington, consumer activist Ralph Nader said Exxon ``shouldnot be allowed to forget'' the spill and that a boycott would sendthe oil giant a message.
He and others blasted Exxon for failing to be prepared for thespill and not rapidly responding to the accident that fouledhundreds of miles of Alaska's coast.
``We are beginning the war of words and actions against any oilcompany that doesn't understand its responsibility to protect theenvironment,'' Massachusetts state Sen. Carol Amick told a boycottrally in Boston.
J. Edward Surette Jr., executive director of the Bay StateGasoline Retailers Association in Billerica, Mass., said it was tooearly to assess the boycott's impact.
Exxon spokeswoman Sarah Johnson said 10,000 credit cards out of7 million have been cut up and returned to the company since thespill.
The oil company's cleanup strategy must gain Yost's approvalbefore being put into effect.
``The plan is very thin,'' he told a news briefing.
``We are going to be done this summer,'' Yost said.
Exxon released a statement that called the boycott unjust.
ExxonPresident William D. Stevens said the company was ``turning heavenand Earth to set things right.''
Exxon's 60-page, two-part revised strategy to cleanse some 364miles of Alaska's coastline of the oil spilled March 24 by thetanker Exxon Valdez was released Monday.
The tanker struck a reef25 miles from Valdez, spilling more than 10 million gallons ofcrude oil into Prince William Sound.
About 300 miles from the spill site, an observer saw thousandsof dead birds in a wide tidal basin in the Hallo Bay area.
They're one big blob of oil,'' said Ray Bane,superintendent of Katmai National Park, about 275 miles southwestof Valdez.
``We found large oil debris washing and slopping up on ourshores.
We saw one eagle so coated in oil that itcouldn't fly.''
In its proposal, Exxon said it wants to burn or bury the sludgerecovered in the cleanup, which may require exemptions from Alaskaenvironmental law.
Exxon's plan also notes that 191 miles of coastline it describesas ``lightly oiled'' may be left untouched to be cleansed naturallyby wind and water.
James Exon and Bob Kerrey, both Nebraska Democrats,called on U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to investigatepotential price gouging by the oil industry.
They noted that gasprices in Nebraska rose 20 percent from the first of March untilmid-April.
State attorneys general in Washington, Oregon and Idaho echoedthe call.
Since the Exxon Valdez accident, gas prices have increased anaverage 10 percent nationally, while the Northwest saw surges ashigh as 25 percent in less than a month, said Marla Rae, executiveassistant to Oregon Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer.
At a news conference in Houston, Exxon President Stevens said itshowed ``shocking naivete'' to blame the price hikes on his company.
``As you know,'' he told reporters, ``the market for petroleumproducts is set by thousands of markets, thousands of independentdealers across the nation.
