Introduction: A Long Beach-bound Exxon oil tanker ran aground on a reef Friday and spilled an estimated 8.4 million gallons of crude oil into Alaska's Prince William Sound, a pristine Pacific waterway heavily used by kayakers, fishermen and tourists.
It was the largest Alaskan oil spill ever.
Fish and Wildlife Service said the tanker had been spilling oil at a rate of 10,000 barrels an hour but the Coast Guard said the leak had become a mere trickle by 2:30 p.m., Alaska time.
U.S. Coast Guard Petty Officer John Gonzales said in a telephone interview from Valdez that the spill was staying "in the mid-channel" and did not seem to be moving toward the shore.
"We've had no report of any wildlife hurt at this time," he said.
Herring hatch at this time of year and attract up to 20,000 sea birds for the feast.
Environmentalists also expressed concern about whales, sea lions and other wildlife.
Twenty people were aboard the ship but there were no immediate reports of injuries, said Dave Parish, a spokesman for Exxon USA, in a telephone interview from Anchorage.
He said three planes from British Columbia, California and England had been dispatched to the scene for aerial spraying to dilute the oil.
Jon Nelson, a deputy regional director of the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service in Anchorage, said the reef ripped a 150-foot gash in the vessel, which was carrying 1.2 million barrels of oil, and there was fear that the tanker could break apart further.
"If it breaks up on the rocks, then anything could happen," he said in a telephone interview.
They are moving way too slowly," said University of Alaska professor Richard Steiner, who flew over the slick Friday.
We saw six sea lions inside the slick, swimming, trying to avoid it, and they had no idea which way to go."
This will affect everything in the food chain, from crab larvae to orca whales."
Exxon's Parish said everything possible was being done.
"It takes time to get activated," he said.
Floating Oil Booms Gonzales, the Coast Guard spokesman, said the terminal has cleanup equipment on site for minor spills.
He said employees of the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co., which operates the trans-Alaska oil pipeline for a consortium of oil companies, were getting floating oil booms in place by late afternoon.
Prince William Sound, home to orcas, sea otters and fur seals, is important to both the fishing and the recreation industries.
"It's also a pretty well-established tourist attraction, with sailing and glacier viewing trips.
"It's of concern for two reasons: one is the size of the spill and that this is such a sensitive, very productive area," said Lisa Speer, senior staff scientist with the Natural Resources Defense Council in New York.
Expected Worst " But this could be a catastrophic occurrence, so we're concerned," he said.
"Living in Valdez, we've always worried that sometime something like this could happen."
Steve Cowper arrived in Valdez on Friday to evaluate the spill.
The problem is that chemical use can have a bad effect on marine life," he said.
"It's going to be a tough judgment call."
Cowper said that conventional responses, such as booms, probably would not work because the spill is so large. "
This is a major spill by any reckoning.
"We've been able to brag for a long time that there's never been a major oil spill in Valdez Harbor.
