Introduction: How much more of an "investment" should American taxpayers make in the welfare system?
The bill proposes $5.2 billion in new spending over five years, and most of that will increase benefits currently received by welfare recipients.
This thinking was nicely summarized by Rep. Anthony Beilenson, who said plainly, "The truth is, for welfare reform to be successful, it's got to be expensive."
The proposed new spending on welfare should be viewed as an investment, say its proponents, led by Rep. Thomas Downey.
They point out that part of the money will go for special education, training and work programs for welfare mothers, to induce them off the rolls and into jobs.
At the same time they say, certain existing benefits -- mainly Aid to Families With Dependent Children (AFDC) -- must be increased to offset real declines since the base year of 1970.
House members on both sides of the aisle agree that welfare-to-work programs are worthwhile.
That conclusion was presumably the basis for the bipartisan consensus that was going to produce a serious welfare-reform bill this year.
But less than a quarter of the $5.2 billion outlay would go for that purpose.
That might produce reprisals from voters who've watched their tax dollars build and maintain the welfare system, with little evident return on their investment.
In fact, while the level of AFDC benefits has decreased in real terms since 1970, the total level of all welfare benefits has not.
Together, spending for the seven major welfare programs (those just mentioned plus the Women, Infants and Children program and the Low Income Energy Assistance program) has actually increased since 1970 by 232% in constant dollars, to an annual total $65.7 billion.
The House Democrats' claim that welfare recipients are worse off than they were in 1970 -- in terms of the level of benefits received -- is dubious.
By adding several welfare programs to what already exists (without eliminating any), the House bill adds another layer to an already complex welfare system.
By further increasing rather than gradually reducing the level of benefits available to recipients, it makes welfare more, not less, enticing.
By diluting proposed work-for-welfare requirements, it diminishes the importance of work.
Earlier this year, there were hopeful signs that we would see sweeping, serious welfare-reform legislation emerge from Congress.
Democrats and Republicans alike agreed on the need for change.
