Introduction:The Yugoslav army issued a "final ultimatum" to breakaway Slovenia on Saturdaynight to halt what it called continuing attacks against federal forces inSlovenia or face "decisive military action.
The situation is dramatic, and Yugoslavia threatens atany moment to break apart," Gen. Marko Negovanovic, a member of the generalstaff, said on Belgrade television.
His statement, just a day after both sides agreed to a cease-fire,indicated that a plan to resolve the state's ethnic, political and economicdisputes had gone off the rails less than 18 hours after it was accepted.
Earlier Saturday evening, Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic forced yetanother delay in the election of Stipe Mesic, a Croat, as president ofYugoslavia.
The Tanjug news agencyreported that 200,000 Serbs were expected to join a territorial militia inSerbia, the biggest Yugoslav republic, which opposes independence for Sloveniaand Croatia, and Negovanovic said Croatia had ordered a mobilization of its"police" reserves.
Urgent legislative meetingSlovenia's parliament wascalled into emergency session after a 12-point list of demands from the armywas presented to republic leaders, insisting that all impediments to federalarmy operations be removed as part of a Western-brokered cease-fire.
Thepeace package was assembled by federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic, brokeredby an emergency mission of the European Community and accepted by the leadersof Slovenia and Croatia, as well as Serbia.
But Saturday night Markoviccharged that Slovenia's President Milan Kucan had "torpedoed" the plan byinsisting that the moratorium on independence had to be approved by hisparliament to take effect.
'No wayback'"There is no way back from Slovenian independence," he told reportersin Ljubljana.
"I cannot foresee Slovenia becoming a part of Yugoslavia in ademocratic way.
The only possibility in this connection is her forcedannexation.
"The Yugoslav army appeared to be beefing up its militarypresence in Slovenia, sending additional tanks across Croatia toward Sloveniaand dispatching two warships from Split, in Croatia, to the port of Koper, inSlovenia.
The Slovenian defense forces continued efforts to recapture borderposts and said they had several under their control.
Casualties mountAtleast 40 people were killed in the first two days of fighting in Slovenia,including 20 federal army soldiers, four Slovenian fighters and 12 civilians,said Janez Jansa, the Slovenian defense minister.
He estimated that the tollmight actually be twice as high.
In Zagreb, the Croatian capital, federalmilitary aircraft flew low, and federal garrisons stood on full alert.
"We do not want to cut all links with other republics," he said.
Thecrisis evoked further expressions of anguish from foreign leaders, and for thefirst time a high-placed U.S. official hinted that the administration may beweighing the possibility of recognizing Croatia and Slovenia. "
The StateDepartment said Saturday that U.S. dependents at its consulate in Zagreb,Croatia's capital, were being allowed to leave Yugoslavia.
TheState Department made the announcement a day after urging Americans inSlovenia and Croatia to leave as soon as they could and suggesting thatAmericans defer non-essential travel to Yugoslavia until the tensions subside.
