According to Federal Aviation Administration records, the McDonnell Douglas Corp. MD-82 jet made emergency landings in 1985 and 1986 following the loss of power in one of its two engines.
A Northwest spokesman confirmed that the incidents happened, but said they weren't related to Sunday's crash of Flight 255.
Though federal investigators were looking into a number of possible causes for the crash, which occurred shortly after takeoff, engine failure appeared to be a likely culprit.
According to Associated Press reports, some witnesses to the crash, including an air traffic controller, said they saw blue flame coming from one of the jetliner's engines just before it hit the ground and exploded into a fireball.
Even so, some congressional aides believe there will be a "spillover" effect, and that all aviation safety issues will now get closer scrutiny.
"There is going to be a lot of noise from Capitol Hill," said John Galipault, president of the Aviation Safety Institute.
Added a Senate Commerce Committee staff member: "Delays and other consumer concerns will end up in the back seat."
In Detroit, federal crash inspectors and representatives of United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit, the engine maker, arrived at the accident scene.
Officials said that the aircraft's flight recorders, which record cockpit conversations, had been found in wreckage that extended over half a mile.
The MD-82 jet, which has a good safety record, is designed to be able to take off and land even if one engine fails.
In addition to a large fuel load for the flight to Phoenix, Ariz., the flight was jammed with passengers.
There were 153 people on a plane with 143 passenger seats.
Wire-service reports said two persons on the ground also were killed, and that a 4-year-old girl was hospitalized in critical condition.
The FAA, in a May 29 response, told the board it essentially agreed with its recommendations and would take steps to require inspections of the engine and replacement of parts where necessary.
The new rules, proposed last month, will go into effect this fall, FAA officials said.
In its April report, the National Transportation Safety Board warned that "many" of the 330 MD-80 series airplanes operated by 12 U.S. and 14 foreign airlines world-wide "are potential candidates" for engine failure.
However, engineering changes have been made in some engines.
In others, airlines have made changes, based on a Pratt &amp; Whitney service bulletin, to reduce the risk of pin failure.
John Lauber, one of five members of the National Transportation Safety Board, said at a news conference at a hotel near the airport last night that there was no evidence at this point that either engine exploded or caught fire during flight.
He stressed that it was too early to draw any firm conclusions.
Despite an excellent safety record, Northwest could be hurt in a number of ways by the crash.
Among other things, the accident has focused attention on its recent service problems as well as discord among its workers.
Such concerns arose following reports of a work slowdown by Northwest mechanics.
There were reports yesterday that relatives of crash victims being flown in from Phoenix were asked to switch from one Northwest jet to another because of mechanical problems.
A Northwest spokesman said the engines involved in those two incidents had since been replaced by other JT8D-200 series engines.
The controllers reported that shortly after the jetliner lifted off, it pitched from left to right, according to FAA spokesman John Leyden.
Then they "saw a blue flash from the left engine," Mr. Leyden said.
FAA records show that besides those incidents that involved the plane that crashed, problems with the turbine sections of JT8D-200 series engines occurred on three Republic flights in the past four years.
None of those problems resulted in a serious accident.
In another incident, at the Detroit airport in October 1985, an engine on an MD-82 "popped and began to unspool" on takeoff.
An FAA official said all jetliners, in order to be certified, must be capable of completing their takeoff ascent even if one engine fails, provided the aircraft is within prescribed weight limits.
Why the Northwest airliner failed to make the climb and whether it was carrying too much weight will be subjects for federal investigators, he said.
Congress is expected to act on a half-dozen major aviation bills this fall.
Staff members now expect those bills to attract new measures aimed at improving safety.
"When people get back (from their August recess), they will be looking for an opportunity to do something."
He added, "We will want to hear a thorough examination of everything that took place with that airplane and what was going on at the airport."
Sunday's crash was the first time in 24 years that passengers were killed in an accident involving a Northwest plane.
