Introduction: World Bank President Barber Conable was so well regarded during his 20-year career as a Republican congressman from New York that some journalists nicknamed him "H.R."
And to many on Capitol Hill, Mr. Conable still is.
But at the World Bank, Mr. Conable finds himself under fire.
The World Bank has been reluctant to step out on this issue in confrontation and conflict with the Treasury," charges Sen. Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat and Congress's leading voice on the debt problem.
Rep. John LaFalce, a New York Democrat and another leader on the issue, agrees.
While the debt morass has deepened, Mr. Conable's World Bank has looked inward, shuffling its organization charts around in a disruptive reorganization and then campaigning for a $74.8 billion increase in its capital.
As Congress considers the increase, liberal critics on Capitol Hill are demanding that Mr. Conable show he is ready to use the bank's vast resources to make some direct impact on reducing the huge burden of Third World debt.
He has clung to the bank's traditional role of a conventional lender and adviser to developing nations and has deferred on ideas about the debt to the man who picked him for his job -- U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker.
Mr. Conable subscribes to the "Baker Plan," which stresses new lending by commercial banks and the World Bank to debtor countries that adopt growth-oriented, market-based economic reforms.
That policy contrasts sharply with some of the more aggressive debt-reduction plans.
Sen. Bradley, worried that the debt burden stalls growth and threatens political stability in developing countries, proposes that Third World debtors be required to make certain economic reforms; in return, their lending banks would forgive some of the loans and write them down on their books.
Even the World Bank's longtime financial wizard, Eugene Rotberg -- who quit the bank for Merrill Lynch over Mr. Conable's reorganization plan -- proposed last month that the World Bank guarantee new 20-year commercial-bank loans to Third World countries.
Other experts advocate a "debt facility" to buy and refinance the debts.
We can't go to our member countries and say, 'Give us a tremendous capital increase so we can assume the obligations of all these other creditors that a developing country owes.'
Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard economist who has offered one of many debt-reduction plans, says the World Bank's officials "have the great potential to play a central role in the problem, but they're basically ducking.
There is a lack of intellectual leadership within the bank itself."
Even some Reagan administration officials privately despair of Mr. Conable's leadership and fear that it may have been a mistake to appoint him.
While financial experts often urge the bank to do more, the ponderous institution has intervened only about half a dozen times in debt crises, usually just to guarantee a small portion of a commercial-bank loan package.
Also within the bank's own ranks, there is talk that could lead to a more aggressive role on debt once President Reagan leaves office. "
Partly in response to the external and internal pressures, Mr. Conable sent a debt study to his board early in April.
"The likelihood is that the bank will need to play a more extensive and diversified role in two areas: new money packages and facilitating other forms of financial relief, including debt-reduction schemes," declares the study, which was drafted by David Bock, a vice president and the bank's debt expert.
Published early this year, the report noted that the debtor countries' position "has stubbornly failed to improve," said "imagination and resolve are needed," and emphasized that "leadership will itself be crucially important."
Founded in 1944, it has evolved into a well-paid bureaucracy of 6,000 working in 17 buildings a few blocks from the White House, ignored by tourists but a mandatory stop for finance ministers and bankers visiting Washington.
The bank earns more than $1 billion annually, sports a top credit rating in securities markets and lent nearly $18 billion last year.
Under Robert McNamara, the bank began aiding efforts to alleviate rural poverty, control population growth and fight illiteracy.
Clausen, his successor, it increased its loans to finance structural adjustments -- rather than specific development projects -- in Third World economies and also disbursed money more quickly.
He also has set a goal for alleviating poverty in Asia and has won new financing to help the poor countries of Africa.
He set up staffs to handle environmental and women's issues.
One of these is the "Safe Motherhood Initiative," a project designed to lower the high rate of deaths during childbirth, especially in Africa.
Funds will be increased for related health and nutrition programs.
"We have had a pretty good year," he says.
and we are well on the way toward a substantial general capital increase."
And, he adds, "I have changed a lot of emphasis in our programs."
Traditionally, conservatives have criticized the bank, charging that its policies promote central planning and thus discourages market forces.
But the debt crisis is causing liberals to question Mr. Conable's leadership from a different direction.
If he disagrees, maybe we'll see some new ideas at the World Bank."
Bank staffers cite a loan to Chile last year over U.S. opposition.
But the new money is being swamped by interest payments, and commercial banks are putting up little new money of their own.
Also that year, the World Bank took back in repayments $291 million more than it pumped into the three largest Latin debtors -- Brazil, Mexico and Argentina.
Last year, that was reversed; the three countries received a $719 million inflow.
However, that again was more than offset by commercial-bank outflows.
Rep. Joseph Kennedy III, a Massachusetts Democrat, charges that "the World Bank is just laundering funds that go back to the banks."
Like Secretary Baker, Mr. Conable instinctively dismisses sweeping debt-relief plans as coercive or non-market-oriented.
He rejects any notion that the bank might get involved in directly refinancing or providing security for debt on a broad scale.
"We are not there to try and handle their short-term debt problems, and if you think we are, then I think you misunderstand the nature of this institution," he says.
But Mr. Conable's own nature still isn't clear, Rep. LaFalce argues.
But he doesn't have his own identity as president of the World Bank.
He was created by Jim Baker and George Bush in this job.
His reputation now rests on how he defines himself."
