More than 150 metersand gauges track seismic activity, rock strain, crustal tilt, tidalmovements and ground water levels.
The data are telemetered to Tokyo where they are monitored around the clockin the hope that six experts, to be summoned at a moment's notice, willrecognise unusual phenomena that may indicate an imminent earthquake.
If thecommittee so advises, Japan's prime minister will issue an earthquakewarning for the Tokai area.
Areas prone to landslides and tidal waves will beevacuated.
Hospitals, firefighters and rescue crews will go on alert.
Andthen everyone will wait for an earthquake measuring eight on the Richterscale.
But for increasingly vocal sceptics in Japan, it is at best a misguidedeffort that wastes money and is dangerously misleading the public.
Despitethe protests, however, Japan's earthquake prediction programme rolls alongon inertia, insularity and unrealistic public expectations.
Research was alsobeing taken seriously in the US, Russia and China.
In Japan, prediction took on urgency when seismologists concluded that theTokai area was overdue for a significant quake.
Even prediction supportersadmit there is no scientific theory on which to base a forecast.
Unfortunately, it hasproved impossible to conclude consistently and definitively whether thesignspredictors look for - swarms of small earthquakes, unusual bulges andcreeps in the earth's crust, sudden changes in geomagnetism or electricalresistivity - are precursors or simply background geologic noise.
Precursors are often only recognised as such after a large earthquake.
Andmany earthquakes occur without any identifiable precursor, even inretrospect.
There are also questions as to whether Japan's monitoring efforts arefocused in the right place.
The city is overdue for abig quake, according to several theories.
Japan has had numerous killerquakes outside the Tokai monitoring network, including a 7.8 earthquake offthe coast of Hokkaido last year that claimed more than 200 lives.
Historically, strain along theSuruga Trough has been released in infrequent large earthquakes, rather thannumerous small ones.
Mogi says they now believethat precursor patterns may be particular to each section of a fault.
Hesays if they knew what precursory phenomena occurred the last time thatsection of the fault slipped, in 1854, they would be able to predict thenext earthquake.
Aside from the Tokai effort, scientists outside the programme are disturbedthat it is so generously funded and has so little to show.
Japan's prediction research activities, primarily overseen by theMinistry of Education, Science and Culture, are subject to no such review.
High public expectations are coming back to haunt the six-member panel ofexperts, which must conclude that the gathered data indicate either 'a causefor concern' or 'no cause for concern'.
Mogi would like to add a thirdcategory between the two that would indicate 'some level of concern'.Many scientists agree a 'maybe' is not unreasonable, given the state of theart.
Public officials, however, are insisting the experts make an 'it'scoming' or 'it's not' decision.
