Introduction:   Two years ago, it looked as if a vast part ofthe nation's farm empire was burning up as drought and heat parchedcrops and livestock.
But the 1988 drought wasn't as bad as it might have been,according to an Agriculture Department analysis.
For those who eked out someproduction, or had grain stored from previous years, it wasn't toobad.
It concentrated on the most severe drought region,centered in nine states of the Midwest and upper Great Plains.
All of the information used in the study was from USDA's annualFarm Costs and Returns Survey, which includes detailed income andexpense information derived from personal interviews of farmoperators.
As used by the agency, net farm income includes gross incomefrom farming during the calendar year, including federal payments,minus costs of production.
It also includes allowances for changesin the value of inventories and adjustments for depreciation andother factors.
_ The number of farms considered financially vulnerable continuedto decrease in 1988 in both the drought and non-drought regions.
_ The average farm in the drought region survived financially byselling off inventories and taking advantage of higher commoditymarket prices to redeem price support loans made by USDA'sCommodity Credit Corp. No state-by-state breakdowns were included in the report.
Thenine states studied as the ``drought region'' were Illinois,Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota, SouthDakota and Wisconsin.
In the drought states, 62.2 percent of the farms were said to bein favorable financial position, compared with 62.8 percent in 1987.
``Even with lower incomes, farmers in the drought regioncontinued to improve their debt position (in relation to assets),''the report said.
The report noted that higher market prices helped reduce thedirect payments to farmers in 1988 under USDA's commodity programs.
Nationally, those payments dropped to $9.8 billion from $11.5billion in 1987.
Hunters and others returning to the UnitedStates from Mexico with animal trophies might run into someobstacles at the border.
The Agriculture Department says inspectors are on guard againstitems that can carry Boophilus ticks into the United States.
``This tick, which carries bovine babesiosis _ a serious cattledisease often called Texas cattle fever _ was eradicated from theUnited States in 1943,'' said James W. Glosser, administrator ofthe department's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.
Strict measures are being taken to prevent the reintroduction ofthe tick, he said.
Hides that havebeen tanned or soaked in a saltwater solution with mineral acid,and dry antlers can be imported from Mexico without restriction,provided they are certified to be of Mexican origin.
Glosser said raw and untreated hides and antlers may qualify ifthey are certified by the Mexican government to have been treatedfor ticks.
Alternately, they may be dipped at one of severalMexican cattle export facilities along the border.
John Roberts, a scientist in the department's AgriculturalResearch Service, said the tiny plots are planted in July about 20miles apart along an interstate highway route through Georgia,Florida, Alabama, Louisiana and Mississippi, then looping back intoGeorgia.
But Roberts, who works at the agency's research facility atGriffin, Ga., said the small test plots show real promise as asurvey method.
