Introduction: A B-52 bomber crashed and burst intoflames early today on a runway while practicing ``touch-and-go''landings at K.I.
The plane, normally equipped to carry nuclear bombs, crashedabout 1:15 a.m., said Lt. Naomi Siegal, a spokeswoman at theStrategic Air Command installation.
No weapons were aboard, said Lt. Col. George Peck, a spokesmanfor SAC headquarters in Omaha, Neb.
The crew was practicing landings after a seven-hour trainingflight when it crashed during one of its touch-and-go approaches,Peck said.
During such maneuvers, landing gears touch the ground butthe plane doesn't land.
All three sections of the plane burned on impact, said SeniorAirman Tim Sanders, a base spokesman.
Theywere taken to Marquette General and base hospitals.
Members of the crew suffered broken bones, but no one was burned,said Capt.
Senior Airman Tim Sanders, another base spokesman, said thoseaboard were Capt.
Mark Hartney, 29, an aircraft commander fromMulberry, Fla.; 1st Lt. Michael S. Debruzzi, 26, a pilot from NewBrighton, Minn.; Capt.
Anthony D. Phillips, 28, a radar navigatorfrom Folkston, Ga.; 1st Lt. James W. Herrmann, 30, a navigator fromSharpsville, Pa.; 1st Lt. Daniel McCarrick, 25, an electronicwarfare officer from Succasunna, N.J.; Airman 1st Class, Joseph A.Vallie, 20, a gunner from Stephenson, Mich.; Maj. William R.Kroeger, 52, an instructor pilot from Fountain Hills, Ariz.; and 1stLt.
Gregory C. Smith, 26, an upgrade pilot from Henning, Minn. Allwere based at Sawyer.
Herrmann and Smith were listed in stable condition at the basehospital, said Technical Sgt.
``We are counting our blessings,'' Bailey said.
Peck said a board of officers will investigate the accident,adding weather did not appear to be a factor in the crash.
Peck said it was not unusual for B-52 training missions to be outat that hour.
``Crews have to be trained to fly at any time of the day or nightin any weather,'' he said.
The eight-engine B-52, which was deployed in the early 1950s, isthe military's biggest bomber, with a wingspan of 185 feet and amaximum takeoff weight of 488,000 pounds.
A B-52 bomber with radar problems crashed in Arizona'a MonumentValley in October 1984, killing two crew members, after its wingsclipped a mesa.
Four B-1Bs have crashed in the four years the plane has beenflying, including two nine days apart in November.
No one was killed in either crash and investigators have notdisclosed what caused the accidents.
Six crewmen died and 10 were injured Oct. 11 when an Air Forcetanker en route from K.I.
Sawyer crashed at Wurtsmith Air Force Basenear Oscoda.
Wurtsmith and Sawyer are Michigan's two SAC bases.
