``The worst thing we could have done early on was try to boomthe vessel.
We would have lost the vessel,'' said Exxon ShippingCo.
A boom wasn't placed around the vessel for 11 hours because itwasn't available in Valdez, Exxon officials have said.
Iarossi also said Exxon has changed its policy because of thespill and now requires crews to be aboard ship, where drinking isprohibited, four hours before sailing.
Authorities charged thecaptain had been drinking before the Valdez sailed.
Early Tuesday, Exxon said it had finished transferring about 42million gallons of crude to three other ships.
Another 42 milliongallons of oily waste water remained aboard the Valdez, whichspilled more than 10 million gallons of crude into Prince WilliamSound when it struck a reef March 24.
If freed, the still-leaking ship, which has eight holes some 20feet long in its hull, will be towed to a remote and already fouledcove for repairs.
Port officials there said theyweren't sure if they'd allow that, even though the $12 millionrepair bill would provide about 200 jobs.
``We're not willing to trade in the environment for jobs,''Portland port spokesman Darrel Buttice said Monday.
Neil Goldschmidt said Tuesday there are ``a lot ofquestions that need to be answered'' before the Valdez is allowedin.
``We will take apart the environmentalplanning for every aspect of oil development in Alaska and in othersensitive areas where the environment potentially could bethreatened,'' he told a House appropriations subcommittee.
But after Long Island law enforcement authorities waited asecond day for Hazelwood to turn himself in, the Suffolk Countydistrict attorney's office announced there would be no surrenderthat day.
Hazelwood, 42, is accused operating the ship while under theinfluence of alcohol, reckless endangerment and negligent dischargeof oil.
``Dozens of otters are dying beforerescuers can get to them,'' he said.
Six otters were flown to SeaWorld in San Diego on Monday for rehabilitation.
Sablefish and shrimp fisheries in Prince Williamwaters also have been closed.
Tendrils of oil hadfloated past a boom streched across the bay, said officials.
U.S. Sen. Frank Murkowski, a champion of oil exploration inAlaska, asked that plans for drilling in Bristol Bay, the state'srichest fishing grounds, be set aside until the industry candemonstrate that it can respond effectively to spills.
Meanwhile, a multimillion-dollar class-action lawsuit was filedMonday in federal court in California against Exxon Corp., chargingthat the spill has led to gas prices of 10 to 15 cents more agallon for California drivers.
