Introduction: A controversial videotape being shown among activists nationwide shows Los Angeles police officers intentionally hurting the nonviolent demonstrators they are arresting.
At one point, two officers twist a woman's arm till she rises from the ground, her face wrenched in agony.
In another scene, a young man winces as officers lead him along.
Police departments nationwide say it's a tried and true way to make uncooperative protesters cooperate.
But opponents call the term a euphemism for torture.
Demonstrators have alleged police brutality at least since Freedom Riders launched their sit-down strikes in Alabama almost 30 years ago.
This time, however, the outcry -- including the videotapes of police in action -- comes from anti-abortion protesters with Operation Rescue, whose members tend to see themselves as law-and-order conservatives.
As a result, traditional political alliances have been turned topsy-turvy.
Suddenly, some pro-choice liberals are as supportive of the police as conservative hawks were during 1960s demonstrations, while some anti-abortion Republicans are voicing the sort of "police state" rhetoric once associated with anti-war radicals.
Other conservative lawmakers have echoed his concerns, and on Nov. 15, with little media attention, President Bush signed legislation withholding certain federal grants from cities whose police use excessive force.
Meanwhile, police officers, many of whom are sympathetic to the anti-abortion cause, claim that religious zeal -- and perhaps the use of muscle relaxants -- has given Operation Rescue anti-abortion protesters an unusually high tolerance to pain -- or even a martyr's appetite for it.
Caught off guard by an ambush from their conservative allies, police are howling that the new law -- which could deprive Los Angeles alone of more than $50 million a year in federal aid -- will handcuff them.
"I think it's utter stupidity," Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates said.
While Gates acknowledged that this issue stirs up memories of the controversy about "chokeholds" -- a restraint the LAPD now uses only in life-threatening situations as a result of fierce public pressure -- he argues that "come-along" techniques, properly used, are the safest, most effective way to arrest nonviolent demonstrators.
On a recent morning, for example, the Los Angeles Police Academy gym echoed with the unmistakable sounds of force being exerted, as pairs of recruits, dressed in dark blue sweats, kicked, jabbed, swung their night sticks, or grappled one another into chokeholds or pain-compliance holds.
Reacting to one phase of the exam, a woman cadet knocked back an assailant's hand, backed up quickly and leveled her weapon at the man's chest, shouting: "Put your hands up, lock your elbows, spread your fingers."
Had this been a real incident, she would have had to decide in a flash of synapses whether "reasonable force" included opening fire with her handgun.
Deadly force is one extreme among the techniques officers must choose from in confronting suspected lawbreakers, explained Sgt.
The least forceful tactic is a simple request -- "Would you do this?"
Among the most simple "come-along" compliance techniques are twist- and wrist-locks, in which a subject's arm or wrists are manipulated so that soft tissue and nerves press against bone, Nichols said.
But while some Operation Rescue demonstrators use a standard civil-disobedience technique and "go limp" when asked to move, others link arms.
They become "human worm-balls" and make themselves tense, rendering standard compliance techniques ineffective, officers say.
So LAPD and other police forces around the country, including several in Orange County and the San Diego Police Department, began using a modified martial arts tool called a nunchaku -- now termed a "police control device" -- consisting of two 12-inch lengths of plastic connected by a length of nylon.
To demonstrate, instructors jabbed the device between an arm and the chest of a cadet, and twisted it around in what is known as a "trap-and-wrap" maneuver.
Nichols is puzzled by those who call pain-compliance excessive force, or compare it to the cattle prods police use in South Africa.
Protesters are given every chance to move on their own.
Police actually plead with Operation Rescue demonstrators in some cases, he said.
But protesters in Los Angeles and elsewhere assert that the nunchakus and more conventional come-along holds produced not only agony while being applied, but lingering pain, broken bones, torn ligaments, and, in some cases, long-lasting nerve damage.
As a result, they have filed lawsuits against police in Los Angeles, Sacramento, Atlanta and other cities.
Nichols and other officers are suspicious of Operation Rescue's charges.
It's kind of like watching a movie where someone gets shot 10 times and keeps walking.
In the 25 years that he has been a policeman, Capt.
Patrick E. McKinley of LAPD's Metro Division has worked at demonstrations by the Revolutionary Communist Party and the Jewish Defense League, and at protests for or against everything from apartheid to animal rights.
Nichols and others have alleged that some demonstrators simply take muscle relaxants to increase their tolerance -- a charge an Operation Rescue spokeswoman called "100% incorrect."
In either case, the results are dangerous, said McKinley.
If you don't respond to pain, and it is applied with more force, injuries are possible. "
As Operation Rescue built momentum, engaging in civil disobedience at clinics around the country, the allegations of police brutality increased: * In San Diego, an officer reportedly moved through the demonstrators singing: "Don't try to understand 'em, just round 'em up and brand 'em."
* In Pittsburgh, women claimed they were sexually molested by officers.
* In West Hartford, Conn., officers removed their badges and name tags -- purportedly to avoid cutting demonstrators -- and then allegedly hauled protesters away with come-along holds, by lifting them with sharp-edged plastic handcuffs, or with "crotch carries" in which a night stick is stuck between the protester's legs.
" In demonstrations in those cities and others, including Boston, Atlanta and Denver, protesters alleged that officers continued to apply come-along holds after demonstrators had complied with their commands, administering pain as a form of "curbside justice."
Implicit in the protesters' complaints is a sense that they have been betrayed by kindred spirits.
"It wasn't at all like the old anti-war demonstrations where people were calling the police pigs, being belligerent," said Dan Bruno, an accountant for the city of Orange, whose right wrist was broken at a March 25 Los Angeles demonstration.
Operation Rescue has not gone limp after its encounters with police.
But others said the LAPD had behaved with restraint.
For example, feminist lawyer Gloria Allred, never hesitant to criticize official abuses, said she believes police acted with professionalism last March, issuing fair warnings and acting only after demonstrators failed to comply.
"I can't have much sympathy for them," she said of the anti-abortion "rescuers," as she stood among a vociferous group of pro-choice "clinic defenders" at a Dec. 9 demonstration and counterdemonstration in Fullerton. "
The pain inflicted on women's lives by Operation Rescue people is enormous.
Chief Gates, an outspoken conservative, does not bask in this new-found support.
Village Voice columnist Nat Hentoff has skewered liberal civil libertarians for letting their ideology stop them from supporting anti-abortion protesters' fight to restrain what he calls "the torture police."
He also has charged that his media colleagues have turned their backs on the uncomfortably complex issue.
At a commission briefing on police brutality charges, organized by Allen in September, Robert McCue, chief of the West Hartford police, defended his officers.
I don't want them concerned with abortions, nuclear freezes, saving the whales or whatever."
Even before the commission met, conservative lawmakers were joining Sen. Armstrong in lashing out against police pain-compliance tactics and pushing legislation to restrain them.
Rep. Robert Dornan (R-Garden Grove) read into the Congressional Record a column by William F. Buckley Jr. comparing the West Hartford demonstrations to civil rights demonstrations in Alabama three decades ago: "It is hard to believe that Bull Connor, directing white redneck policemen, caused more brutality in the treatment of blacks than was caused by the police of West Hartford in their treatment of members of Operation Rescue."
An amendment introduced by conservative lawmakers in the House and Senate, and tagged onto a HUD bill later signed by the President, states that no Community Planning and Development grants may be paid "to any municipality that fails to adopt and enforce a policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by law enforcement agencies within the jurisdiction of said municipality against any individuals engaged in nonviolent civil rights demonstrations."
The Justice Department already investigates charges of police abuse, Gates pointed out.
But if this "horrendous" new measure has its intended effect, eliminating the use of painful control techniques in nonviolent demonstrations, his department may have no choice but to watch as demonstrators of any stripe take over any facility they choose, he said.
Sobel was "amused" at how quickly lawmakers addressed complaints of police brutality that, she said, have been raised for years by protesters against U.S. policy in El Salvador by members of the Revolutionary Communist Party and other groups generally viewed less sympathetically by conservatives.
I just hope conservatives remember that it includes everyone."
An ancient Asian farm tool has become a cutting edge weapon for many police officers in Southern California.
