Introduction: President Bill Clinton's pledge to 'end welfare as we know it' was one ofthe most popular lines in last year's election campaign.
His idea of astrict two-year time limit on welfare cheques appealed to voters (especially'Reagan democrats') not just as a way of cutting government spending andthus reducing taxes, but as a solution to the nation's most pressing socialproblems.
In the American mind, welfare has become synonymous with such evils as urbandecay, fatherless children, drug abuse and violent crime.
By promisingradical welfare reform, Mr Clinton was sending a powerful subliminalmessage: he would wage war on all the diseases that are ravaging urbansociety.
Since becoming president, Mr Clinton has barely mentioned the word welfare,raising fears that his grandiose promise will prove as cynical as formerPresident George Bush's 'read my lips: no new taxes' pledge.
It claims both measures will help shift people offwelfare by 'making work pay.
If healthcare reform guarantees health insurance for all workers,welfare recipients will no longer be able to reject jobs on the grounds thatthey stand to lose their health care benefits.
But they are hardly going to solve America'swelfare problem, which differs substantially from that in Europe.
In keeping with Franklin Roosevelt's dictum that a permanent dole is 'anarcotic, a subtle destroyer of the human spirit', the US has never providedpermanent welfare support for single, able-bodied adults.
The objection is not that some families instraitened circumstances need AFDC as a short-term prop, but that half ofthose on welfare behave as though they have a meal ticket for life.
So what should Mr Clinton do?Many conservatives favour the concept of a strict time limit.
Once peopleaccept that benefits are not going to be paid indefinitely, they argue,behaviour will change.
Teenagers will stop having babies and startrecognising the economic advantages of marriage.
Those whose welfarebenefits expire will face a stark choice: accept low-paid employment or handover children for adoption.
With its economic life supportsystem (welfare) ripped away, the underclass will shrivel.
But no modern president would contemplate so brutal a social experiment.
Mothers with young children would also be offered state child carefacilities.
Fortunately there is a fall back position for Mr Clinton: the bipartisanFamily Support Act of 1988, which he helped steer through Congress.
Next year states willreceive federal assistance only if they ensure that at least 15 per cent ofthe 'employable' welfare case load is working or in training programmes; by1995 the required ratio rises to 20 per cent.
