Introduction:   Less than a month before elections, theassassination of a third presidential candidate has pushed Colombiato the brink of political chaos.
``The gravest aspect of Colombia's bloodletting is that thegovernment has no idea how to even slow it,'' said a member of aregional human rights committee based in Medellin, the cocainecapital.
But he said hisdesire to lead Colombia was greater than his fear of assassins'bullets.
Two other presidential candidates had already been assassinatedduring the campaign for May 27 elections.
Sen. Luis Carlos Galan ofthe ruling Liberal Party was gunned down last August at a politicalrally in Bogota, and Bernardo Jaramillo of the leftist PatrioticUnion Party was killed last month at the Bogota airport.
But theMedellin cartel denied involvement, and no government official hasyet said who was responsible for Pizarro's assassination.
On Saturday Antonio Navarro, a longtime guerrilla leader of theApril 19 Movement, announced he would take Pizarro's place ascandidate for president.
Traffickers have carried out a terrorist campaign that haskilled nearly 300 Colombians in the past nine months in an effortto halt the government's campaign to capture and extradite drugbarons to the United States.
Several politicians and analysts said an armed assassin couldnot have been aboard a jetliner without the complicity ofgovernment and airport security personnel.
Former president Alfonso Lopez said the assassinations of threecandidates indicated that Colombia's armed forces must bereorganized.
Lopez, of the Liberal Party, was president from 1974 to 1978.
Official investigations have shown that certain members of thearmed forces are allied with drug traffickers and the country'sright-wing death squads.
One of the country's presidential candidates, Alvaro Gomez, saidFriday that Barco should name a three-man council to run Colombia'ssecurity forces to avoid a military coup.
He suggested that Barco had lost control over the armed forces.
The unit achieved its greatest success against drug traffickerswhen it killed a Medellin cartel leader, Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha,in a gunfight last December.
Both Barco and his party's presidential candidate, CesarGaviria, have linked Colombia's salvation to constitutional reform.
Through such reforms they hope to reform the corrupted Congress,strengthen the judicial system and provide more politicalrepresentation for minority parties.
