Introduction:   People caught by Hurricane Hugo lastyear might disagree, but forecasters here say the deadly storm mayhave had a positive side effect _ it got the public's attention.
And one forecaster says hurricane seasons may be getting worse.
But it would have been much more deadly if it had hit almostanywhere else, says Bob Sheets, director of the National HurricaneCenter.
At the advent of the Atlantic hurricane season, which runs fromJune 1 to Nov. 30, Sheets and other hurricane experts are usingHugo's example to get the attention of complacent coastal residentswho've never experienced such fury.
``We'll take advantage of the fact that there was a Hugo lastyear and raise people's awareness,'' said Sheets.
Early warnings about Hugo last September allowed 350,000 peopleto evacuate safely, and in South Carolina the worst of thehurricane struck the Francis Marion National Forest betweenCharleston and Myrtle Beach, Sheets said.
If Hugo had struck a major coastal population center, thedestruction would have been greater than most Americans have everseen, according to computer simulations known as SLOSH models, forSea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes.
Since then, the populationof areas such as south Florida has ballooned and most residentshave never directly experienced a hurricane.
According to one of the nation's leading hurricane experts, Hugomay have been the first in a new era of killer storms.
``No one knows for sure, but the odds are, Florida and the EastCoast are going to get it,'' William Gray, professor of atmosphericscience at Colorado State University, told a national conference ofweather experts this month.
Gray came to this conclusion after his usually accuratepredictions for hurricane activity were off the mark last year.
Hehad figured the 1989 season would be relatively mild, with onlyfour hurricanes; instead, seven hurricanes and four tropical stormskilled a total of 84 people.
``But then he looked atthe rainfall over Africa, and found an amazing correlation betweenrainfall there and hurricane activity over Florida.''
But the Sahel is now getting up tonear-normal rainfall,'' Sheets said.
Gray plans to release his predictions for 1990 on June 5.
Last week, a preseason tropical depression brought heavyrain to Cuba.
The names for Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms this yearare: Arthur, Bertha, Cesar, Diana, Edouard, Fran, Gustav, Hortense,Isidore, Josephine, Klaus, Lili, Marco, Nana, Omar, Paloma, Rene,Sally, Teddy, Vicky and Wilfred.
