Introduction:   ``Mad cow disease'' has killed 10,000 cattle,restricted the export market for Britain's cattle industry andraised fears about the safety of eating beef.
The government insists the disease poses only a remote risk tohuman health, but scientists still aren't certain what causes thedisease or how it is transmitted.
``I think everyone agrees that the risks are low,'' says MartinRaff, a neurobiologist at University College, London.
I have not changed my eating habits, but Icertainly do wonder.''
Sheep offalis still used in pig and poultry feed.
Earlier this month, the government announced it would payfarmers 100 percent of market value or average market price,whichever is less, for each animal diagnosed with BSE.
``I think it is a recognition _ not just of pressure fromfarmers _ but that the public would feel more confident that noBSE-infected animal would ever be likely to go anywhere near thefood chain if there was 100 percent compensation,'' said Sir SimonGourlay, president of the National Farmers Union.
The disease struck one of his own cows, Gourlay said.
``In thecourse of 24 hours, the animal went from being ostensibly quitenormal to very vicious and totally disoriented.''
Because of the disease, the U.S. Department of Agriculture'sAnimal and Plant Health Inspection Service banned imports ofcattle, embryos and bull semen from Great Britain in July, saidMargaret Webb, a USDA spokeswoman in Washington.
Similar embargoes have been imposed by Australia, Finland,Israel, Sweden, West Germany and New Zealand, according to theagriculture ministry, and the European Community has proposed a banon exports of British cattle older than 6 months.
David Maclean, a junior agriculture minister, has complained of``BSE hysteria'' in the media and has insisted that the risk of thedisease passing to humans is ``remote.''
A commission chaired by Professor Sir Richard Southwood ofOxford University reported last year that the cause of BSE ``isquite unlike any bacteria or known viruses.''
There is a human variant of spongiform encephalopathy, known asCreutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Another form, known as kuru, had been found cannibals in NewGuinea.
``It is urgent that the same reassurance can be given about thelack of effect of BSE on human health,'' a consultative committeereported to the agriculture ministry.
The committee's report,released early this year, said it is only a ``shrewd guess'' thatBSE was transmitted through sheep offal in cattle feed.
