Introduction:U.S. military helicopters on Sunday located the wreckage of a plane that crashed last Monday with Texas congressman Mickey Leland and 15 others aboard.
Witnesses who visited the site said there were no survivors.
U.S. rescue and recovery teams said that the plane hit a mountain about 4,300 feet above sea level, having missed clearing the peak by about 300 feet.
"If they would have flown over that peak they would have been home free," said Rep. Gary L. Ackerman (D-N.Y.), a colleague of Leland's who has accompanied search crews for the last two days and was aboard the helicopter that first spotted the wreckage Sunday.
Wreckage Examined Ackerman said that military paratroopers lowered themselves from his helicopter on ropes to examine the wreckage. "
They told us everyone had died instantaneously," Ackerman said.
Also aboard the plane were Hugh Anderson Johnson Jr. and Patrice Yvonne Johnson, both aides to Leland (who were not related); Joyce Francine Williams, an aide to Rep. Ronald V. Dellums (D-Berkeley), and an expert on child nutrition; Y. Ivan Tillen, a New York businessman and friend of Leland's; Robert Woods, a political and economic officer at the American Embassy in Addis Ababa; Gladys Gilbert, a special projects officer for the mission of the U.S. Agency for International Development attached to the embassy; Thomas Worrick, the acting AID representative in Ethiopia, and Worrick's wife, Roberta.
7 Ethiopians Killed Also on board were Debebe Agonofer, an Ethiopian agricultural economist with the AID mission, and six other Ethiopians, including the plane's crew of three.
Reaction to the news in the United States was one of sadness coupled with an outpouring of praise for Leland's work.
A statement issued by President Bush said that "Mickey Leland and the other members of his traveling party, both Americans and Ethiopians, were engaged in a noble cause -- trying to feed the hungry. "
"Their deaths are a collective loss to all humanity," Dellums said.
Discovery of the crash site ended what had been one of the most extensive American search and rescue operations ever conducted in a Third World country.
Three more American helicopters were reported to be en route from Eglin Air Force Base in Florida when word of the discovery came.
The search on Sunday was hampered again by thunderstorms, poor visibility and other conditions that characterized many of the previous days of search.
Gilk said that the crash site, in a mountainous and heavily wooded region, is so remote and inaccessible that the nearest landing site for helicopters is half a mile away, a distance that he said could take as much as three hours to cover on foot.
Discovery of the crash site came at about 1:15 p.m. local time Sunday.
There, the crew came upon a Roman Catholic missionary who told them that he had heard reports from local villagers that a plane had been heard nearby last week.
Presently, the crew found an Ethiopian surveyor who said he could guide them to an area near where the plane had been heard.
The location was described as very steep, with the plane resting on land that was pitched at an angle of about 60 degrees. '
Mostly Rocks and Brush' Crew members described the site as "mostly rocks and brush" and indicated that the pilot of Leland's plane may have been trying to escape bad weather on Monday by following the pathway of a river flowing through a valley.
), who with Ackerman had been flying with search crews for the last two days, said he telephoned House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) from Addis Ababa soon after the discovery was made.
He said that Foley was "heartbroken" at the news.
It appeared to be near the village of Bure.
President Bush, in his Sunday statement, said: "I have known, admired and worked with Mickey Leland for many years.
His sense of compassion and desire to help those in need has aided millions of people from Houston to Addis Ababa.
' Best in Compassion' Foley said that "in his search to look into the plight of the world's most desperate and hungry individuals, Rep. Leland represented the best in compassion that we as a nation possess."
Secretary of State James A. Baker III praised the congressman as "an outstanding statesman and humanitarian who died serving his country."
Leland was a former Houston pharmacist who called the fight against hunger "my passion."
First elected to Congress in 1978, he represented a mostly black and Hispanic section of Houston after the retirement of Rep. Barbara Jordan, a fellow Democrat.
Leland had no significant opposition for his congressional seat since he was first elected, winning his most recent election with 96% of the vote.
Times staff writer Melissa Healy, in Washington, contributed to this story.
