Introduction:LOS ANGELES -- A much-awaited report that paints adistressing picture of brutality and racism in the LosAngeles Police Department, and that calls for the resignationof its chief, could prompt changes in law enforcementnationwide.
The commission, headed by formerDeputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, found that asignificant number of officers use excessive force againstLos Angeles residents, a problem exacerbated by racism andbias in the department.
While the commission stopped short of blaming Chief Gatesfor these problems, it said that no chief should serve morethan two consecutive five-year terms, and that Mr. Gates,having served 13 years, should therefore turn in his badgefollowing a transition period.
But the chief, who has remained steadfast through repeatedcalls from community leaders for his ouster, said later: "Idon't expect to just run away" from the job.
Nearly one-quarter of 650 officers responding to acommission survey agreed that "racial bias on the part ofofficers toward minority citizens currently exists andcontributes to a negative interaction between police andcommunity," and in some cases "may lead to the use ofexcessive force," the report said.
Officers commonly typed racial epithets to one another ontheir patrol car computer systems, such as: "Sounds likemonkey slapping time" and "I almost got me a Mexican lastnight."
Yet supervisors made no effort to monitor or controlthese messages, evidence of a "significant breakdown in thedepartment's management responsibility," the report found.
"This report will be a must-read for police chiefs aroundthe country," said Hubert Williams, executive director of thePolice Foundation, a Washington, D.C., law enforcementresearch group.
Williams likened the report to the Knapp Commission, a1970s blue-ribbon study that exposed widespread corruption inthe New York Police Department and led to significantimprovements there.
Among the commission's recommendations are:-- A commission appointed by the mayor that oversees thedepartment should be reorganized and strengthened, and maderesponsible for handling citizen complaints.
-- A "major overhaul" of the police disciplinary systemand the process used by citizens to file complaints againstLAPD officers, especially in excessive force cases, isneeded.
The current system is "skewed against complainants,"by allowing officers' station-house colleagues to investigatecomplaints, perpetuating a "code of silence" among officers.-- A new community-based police force should focus on"service to the public and prevention of crime" as primarytasks rather than amassing arrest statistics.
However, the commission didn't address how Los Angeleswould pay for this major overhaul, though Mr. Christophersaid that "when you see the costs of settlementsaccelerating" in police misconduct lawsuits as they have inrecent years, "I'm not sure there will be a net cost"increase to implement the changes.
But with the city still sharply divided over the future ofChief Gates, and a general feeling that taxes are high enoughalready, it's questionable whether there will be a populargroundswell to immediately fund changes.
There are 8,450officers here for more than 3.5 million people; Chicago, witha smaller population, has 12,000.However, Michael Yamaki, one of the city's five policecommissioners, believes that given the systemic problems inthe department that have come to light, "citizens now will bemore willing to fund police issues.
Ultimately, voters must decide severalissues, including whether to set term limits on the chief'stenure.
The report "proves once and for all that theRodney King incident was not an aberration," said RamonaRipston, executive director of the American Civil LibertiesUnion of Southern California.
"Any fair reading of the reportconstitutes an `F' for {Chief Gates's} job performance.
"The report shows a particularly damning pattern ofacceptance, and even encouragement, of officers who violatethe rules governing excessive force.
One officer who hadseven complaints against him that had been sustained -- aswell as numerous others that hadn't been -- was described inhis performance evaluation this way: "His contacts with thepublic are always professional and positive and his attitudewith the citizens is one of concern.
"The report also reveals that racially derogatory remarksare made on an ongoing basis within the department; racistjokes and cartoons appear from time to time on bulletinboards in station locker rooms.
Minority officers complain that whites dominate managerialposts within the LAPD, possibly contributing to theseproblems.
Mayor Bradley said he hopes that Chief Gates's will"follow the commission's recommendations" to "commence thetransition to a new chief of police."
