Introduction: THE 74-year-old man said it was "like needles or nails being stuck in" whenpolice handcuffed him behind his back as he lay face down.
Retired RomanCatholic Bishop George Lynch of New York was describing his treatment by WestHartford, Conn., police during a 1989 anti-abortion demonstration.
The demonstrators, most associatedwith Operation Rescue, have charged and testified that police tactics usedduring the past 2 1/2 years in cities such as Denver, Atlanta, Pittsburgh andLos Angeles have resulted in serious injury and led to sexual abuse againstwomen who have been arrested.
Operation Rescue, which draws participantslargely from conservative Catholic and Protestant circles, is a nationalmovement that organizes demonstrations at abortion facilities.
The FBI investigated complaints ofmisconduct by members of his department, he said, and "every single case wasclosed.
"He called pain compliance "a valid tool" used "in directproportion to the amount of resistance."
, when arrested, cooperated with police and the courts, he said.
Similarly, the CBS Evening News reported March 27 "onvarious aspects of police brutality" but did not include examples involvinganti-abortion activists, a producer said.
Philip Wogaman, professor of Christian social ethics atWesley Theological Seminary in Washington, D.C.believes the comparison withother kinds of protests breaks down at several points.
For instance, he said,civil rights demonstrators normally were picketing to assert their right toeat at a lunch counter or ride on a bus, not closing facilities to deny therights of others.
As early as 1989, soon after Operation Rescue beganwidespread sit-ins to disrupt abortion facilities, William B. Allen, thenchairman of the U.S. Civil Rights Commission, sounded an alarm.
"I amconcerned that anti-abortion protesters are receiving selective prosecutionand selectively harsh treatment, unlike that received by other demonstratorsfor other causes," said Allen, who generally opposes abortion.
ColleenO'Connor, the American Civil Liberties Union's national public educationdirector, and Carol Sobel, the ACLU's senior staff counsel in Los Angeles,said they agree that police have abused Operation Rescue participants.
TheACLU is supporting Operation Rescue in some of those situations, they said.
But the civil liberties group is clearly caught between conflicting rights.
The CivilRights Commission in 1989, under pressure from some members of Congress,decided against an investigation of alleged police brutality againstanti-abortion activists and decided not to ask the Justice Department toinvestigate.
A commission spokeswoman said its legal mandate prohibitsdealing with abortion issues.
