Heis then picked up by his shoulders and his face is slammed into the pavement.
The suspect, unconscious, is taken to Valley Medical Center where he is foundto have a dislocated shoulder, a concussion, and numerous cuts, bruises andcontusions.
The offending officer's police report indicatedthat the suspect's injuries were due to a fall from his bike and that heappeared unconscious, although he had also struggled against beinghandcuffed.
There is no mention of police brutality.
None of the back-upofficers reported any brutality.
The suspect subsequently complained of brutality.
But four citizens called to complain that they had witnessedthe arrest and that the suspect not only was not struggling but also had beenbrutally beaten.
According to the witnesses, the officer taunted thesuspect, knelt on the suspect's stomach, beat him numerous times with his cluband kicked him in his face.
Inresponse to another officer's inquiry, the original officer picked up thesuspect, let his head fall to the pavement and said, "It looks like he'sdead."
What if there had notbeen four citizens who observed the brutal beating of my client?One ofthe problems in monitoring police brutality is that almost all victims ofpolice abuse have themselves committed some kind of law violation.
Hecorrectly notes that it is important for police credibility that police chiefsbreak the code of silence and repudiate such acts and attitudes.
Unfortunately, MacNamara also believes that San Jose does not need a citizens'review board.
That is precisely what we need.
State privacy laws combined with investigation and reporting procedures keepbrutality complaints sealed.
Government mustremain accountable to its citizens.
Those government employees who are giventhe right and the power to use force against citizens should be the mostaccountable.
As MacNamara points out, police are public servants.
A minimalinvasion of their privacy is a small price to pay for the power to maim andkill.
Monitoring police brutality is further complicated by the fact thatlocal communities leave it to the police departments to investigate citizencomplaints.
Complaints of police brutality should be handled inan open process that is neutral and thorough.
A system can betheoretically sound, but it must be respected by the public.
I agree withCouncilwoman Blanca Alvarado's suggestion and the San Jose City Council'sdecision to create a system where a city official will receive and trackcitizen complaints about the police.
I would further recommend that localcommunities establish citizen review boards.
Any loss of police confidentiality is a fair and necessarytrade-off for the right to carry and use a club.
