Introduction: Nature stages one of its most spectacular shows on July 11 -- a total eclipseof the sun, one that'll be among the longest this century.
With some people having booked trips as long as three years in advance,airline seats, rental cars and hotel reservations range from difficult toimpossible to get, travel agents and others report.
"The closer you get tothe event, the less there is" available, said Paul Kloetzel, president ofO'Brien Travel Service in San Jose.
"The eclipse will be seen from Hawaii tocentral Brazil.
The length of this"period of totality," as it's known, will depend on where viewers are alongthe path.
Among fans of the heavens, a solar eclipse inspires awe, fascination andgrandeur.
Firm estimates aren't available, but blotted-out-sun watchers areexpected to number more than 100,000 -- perhaps 50,000 to 70,000 in Hawaii andan equal number in Baja.
"It really is the mostspectacular natural phenomenon possible.
"It's romantic images like these that areinspiring a last-minute surge of would-be eclipse-watchers, travel agentssay.
Pamela and Daniel Dei Rossi of Campbell were among those scramblers.
Learning of the eclipse only a month ago, they began calling travel agents.
They called places where relatives had stayed inMexico.
She called a friend in Hawaii for a place to stay, butairline ticket and rental car problems still loomed.
Bullock was leading a group toHawaii, and some late cancellations came up.
"Weare so excited," Pamela Dei Rossi said.
"Though travelarrangements are now tough to come by, some opportunities remain.
One isto go by the back door.
Hawaii and Baja are the prime spots, because --statistically at least -- they offer the best chance of cloudless skies.
Another possibility is to search aroundfor groups making the trip that have had late cancellations, as the Dei Rossisdid.
What probably won't work is the overland route to Baja.
Mexicanauthorities will have a checkpoint from July 7-15 at Guerrero Negro, abouthalfway down the peninsula.
Travelers who can't produce original documentsshowing they have accommodations will be turned back, Cardenas said.
Thosestaying in private homes must also produce a letter of some kind, he said.
Even firm reservations may not be all they seem.
With the eclipse, there's concern theoverbooking could be particularly bad, especially on inter-island flights inHawaii.
That's important because many eclipse-watchers haven't been able tobook a flight directly to the Big Island.
These flights are so overbooked it's actually a laughingstock," saidO'Brien's Kloetzel. "
I have a feeling this is going to be an ugly scene.
