Introduction:   Workmen tunneling under the EnglishChannel have created the first land link between Britain and theContinent, connecting 31 miles of tunnel in a prodigious feat ofengineering and finance.
Eventually a train trip from Paris to London should take threehours.
Despite her countrymen's fears of losing their ancient moatagainst Europe, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher describedthe breakthrough as ``a very exciting moment.''
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' a construction unionofficial in Calais said.
Champagne corks popped and workers danced jigs after Frenchdrillers phoned news of the probe's arrival to their Britishcounterparts.
Initial tests indicated the two halves were 20 inches out ofalignment.
Technicians will be more certain Wednesday, but theycalled the rough line-up ``exceptional.''
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole.
Tunnelers areexpected to walk through and greet each other with handshakes in afew weeks.
Thatcher and French President Francois Mitterrand will meetmid-tunnel on Jan. 26.
About 80 percent of all the drilling is now complete.
Eight workers suffered injures, two seriously, about 90 minutesafter Tuesday's linkup when a tractor rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
The tunnel's cost has soared from an initial estimate of $9.4billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion in caseof unforeseen cost overruns.
The digging is accomplished by gargantuan boring machines thatbring to mind images from Japanese monster movies.
Officials say it is toocostly to extricate the machine.
The tunnels were joined 13{ miles southeast of Folkestone,England, the British terminus near Dover, and 10 miles northwest ofSangatte, near Calais.
Militant workers on the French side are striking for more payand began a work slowdown Thursday, threatening to stall thelink-up.
Eurotunnel PLC announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreementwith its banks on $3.5 billion in new credit.
More than 200 banksare involved in financing the world's costliest tunnel.
The three-hour Paris-to-London trip would be comparable toflying, if transport to and from airports is included, and is halfthe time of the present car-ferry journey.
France hopes the project will revitalize depressed northernregions.
But many Britons fear an influx of continental illsranging from terrorists to rabid animals.
