Introduction:LJUBLJANA, Yugoslavia -- As federal army tanks and jetspounded the breakaway republic of Slovenia last week, thepin-striped brokers of the Ljubljana Stock Exchange defiedair-raid dangers and gathered in their sixth-floor tradingroom.
Bonds issued by the besieged republic traded briskly andclimbed to records.
Yesterday, with a tenuous peace settling over Slovenia,the exchange panicked.
"There is a certain logic to this," says DraskoVeselinovic, the exchange's chief executive.
"Slovenes arenow beginning to see the costs of independence more clearlythan when we were at war.
Their bravado is undiminished,reflected in the almost unanimous feeling that there can beno going back now that blood has been spilled in defense ofindependence.
Their considerabletrade with the rest of Yugoslavia, which helped make them thecountry's richest people, is vanishing.
Their identity isbeing turned upside down; once known as Yugoslavia's"developed north," Slovenia will now be lumped together withWestern Europe's "underdeveloped south."
"The Balkanization of this Balkan country has also becomeEurope's worst nightmare.
Almost every country on thecontinent has its own disenchanted minorities, from theSoviet Baltics to French Corsica, that could be encouraged bythe independence declarations of Slovenia and the neighboringrepublic of Croatia.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has heldup recent events here -- the Yugoslav army assault onSlovenia and the bitter ethnic clashes between Croats andSerbs -- as a warning to his land of what can happen whennationalism fractures a country.
But theWest Europeans also are wary of moving toward recognition ofthe various pieces.
"We have every sympathy for small peoples who aspire toaffirm their national identity by democratic methods," theSwiss foreign minister reportedly told a European conferenceon national minorities. "
But that doesn't mean we can acceptthe unilateral alteration of frontiers.
But as Slovenes measurethemselves with Western Europe, it is they who are the poorercousins.
Joze Mencinger, an economist and former finance ministerof Slovenia, illustrates the republic's economic resilienceby noting that while Yugoslavia's industrial output fell 18%so far this year, Slovenia's declined only 10%.
When remindedby a visitor that Austria, in contrast, is posting robustgrowth, he grows somber.
"Unfortunately, in times oftransition like this, people's expectations are often wrong.
Slovenia is counting onexpanding its already extensive ties with Austria (a jointventure between Austrian and Slovene companies recentlycompleted a high-tech Alpine tunnel opening another bordercrossing) as well as courting more business with its otherold Austro-Hungarian partners, Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
But what Slovenes dream of is one day being admitted tothe EC.
A quarter of all goods produced in Slovenia arepurchased by other Yugoslavs, and Slovene leaders counted onmaintaining these ties even after declaring independence.
"We had been getting a lot of interest from abroad, butthey won't invest now while things are so unsettled," hesays. "
