Introduction:TO MOST PEOPLE, marathons and vacations are mutually exclusive.
Vacation,according to Webster, means "freedom from any activity; rest; respite.
"Amarathon, says the same source, is "a footrace of 26 miles, 385 yards, runover an open course."
But a unique subset has formed: people who like to do both at the sametime.
And to help these folks along, companies arrange tours for marathonvacations.
said Thorn Gilligan, president of MarathonTours in Boston.
Inaddition to air fare and hotel, runners are guaranteed spots in restrictedentry races such as the London Marathon.
Berlin's race (Sept. 27, 1992) has grown withthe demise of the wall.
"Most marathons take you through cities, so you geta chance to see things you'd never see on a sightseeing bus," said Fred Lebow,president of the New York Roadrunner's Club and director of the New YorkMarathon.
Lebow has run in 32 marathons, including London, Paris, Rome,Stockholm, Iceland, Seoul and Vienna.
"The cities aredifferent, but most marathons include a carbo-loading pasta party the nightbefore, medical exams, a post-race celebration, commemorative T-shirts andawards to finishers.
Going to Bermuda, for example,costs approximately $900 from San Francisco.
England has similarorganizations: Sports Tours International and Keith Prowse, a company thatspecializes in British theater, sports and concert tours.
There are also trips that incorporate running into the sightseeingschedule.
Running coach Pat Savage and Hal Higdon, a senior writer forRunner's World, are taking a group to Ireland in June.
The eight-day trip willleave from Chicago and will include sightseeing, guided runs and a fun runfrom Malahide Castle to Swords.
"We know the unique scenic routes andput together special runs.
Running 26 miles just to see a city definitely isn'tfor everyone, but at the very least, it's a way to kill two birds with onestone.
IF YOU'RE INTERESTEDIf you're interestedin combining a vacation and marathon, here are some firms to contact:;   Marathon Tours, 108 Main St., Charlestown, Mass.
