Introduction: It was a scene that recalled the golden days for Ben Johnson.
The media were there, as before, chronicling a news conference.
Johnson was as before, shy and yet brimming with confidence.
This scene, which played out two weeks ago in Italy, was familiar, with one exception.
Overweening confidence among world class athletes is well accepted -- even expected.
Johnson will at last get his chance to do that.
It has been two years since Johnson, then world record-holder at 100 meters, was stripped of his gold medal after testing positive for anabolic steroids at the Seoul Olympics.
Johnson was also suspended from competition for two years; that suspension ends today.
And so the questions begin: What can Johnson do when not assisted by performance-enhancing drugs? "
Once he returns to the sport, and if he returns a winner, all is forgiven," said Paul Gaines, assistant meet director for the Hamilton Spectator Indoor Games, the Canadian meet to be held Jan. 11 that will mark Johnson's return to competition.
With the humility and shame that has been reflected on him, people tend to be more open minded about it.
They hope the guy comes back clean and fast."
It is this apparent contradiction that Ben Johnson must overcome in his comeback.
How much ground will Johnson lose as a drug-free sprinter?
Johnson, speaking at a news conference in Castelfranco Veneto, Italy, expressed little doubt he can regain his form of 1988.
BIG MONEY Promoters of indoor meets this season doubt that Johnson will regain his records, but they hope that fans will turn out in huge numbers to watch him try.
Al Franken, promoter of the Sunkist Invitational, is close to signing Johnson for his Jan. 18 meet, saying Johnson will receive the highest appearance fee Franken has ever paid -- $30,000, compared to the $23,000 Franken paid Carl Lewis.
And there is a bonus in the contract that rewards Johnson for high attendance figures.
"I think honestly, you have to figure that a lot of it is curiosity," Franken said.
"You'll get people who don't care about track, and you may attract back people who have quit coming to track.
His value in Europe and Japan has not waned.
He will be paid $60,000 for a meet in Stockholm.
But American meet directors say they can't pay that kind of money, especially for an unproven runner.
"If he's eligible to compete, to me, Ben Johnson is an attraction," said Ray Lumpp, meet director for the indoor meet at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J.. "I'd like to have Ben Johnson regardless of how he runs.
But how well he's running will determine his value.
Whether he is worth as much after six meets, I don't know.
Howard Schmertz of the Millrose Games in New York has an interest in Johnson, but perhaps not the budget.
As far as the money, I expect a lot of big stars and I'm going to have a lot of problems giving out (big appearence fees).
There is talk of informal athlete boycotts in Canada, where indoor meets often provide car fare and little else to star athletes.
Johnson reportedly will be paid $10,000 (Canadian) for the meet in Hamilton, a figure that has caused some jealousy among his peers.
Lumpp, who traditionally has one of the largest budgets in North America, said resentment is a problem faced every season by meet directors.
"How many heavy hitters can a meet afford?"
Hamilton promoter Gaines has heard it before, and makes no apology for paying Johnson more than other athletes.
"My answer to that is 'Who puts (fans) in the seats?
It would be ironic if Johnson becomes the star who revitalizes indoor track and field after being blamed for the steady decline of sponsor interest in outdoor track. "
There has been damage to the sport and people want to blame Ben personally for that damage," Gaines said.
"We are very cognizant of the fact that people are looking upon his return with something like skepticism and animosity.
Some meet directors report concern that longtime sponsors will be reluctant to be associated with a meet that has Johnson as its marquee athlete, given Johnson's former association with anabolic steroids.
Franken said he had meetings with his sponsor, Sunkist, to discuss the possible image problem.
Schmertz, too, has given the matter some thought.
I don't know how the public is going to react.
Are they going to treat him as someone who has paid his penalty and now he's clean?
Will Kern, meet director for the Times Indoor Games, hesitates at considering it a moral issue.
I can't say that it's wrong, especially when deep down I know Johnson's not the only one who's ever taken drugs. "
One thing that may not happen is a much-discussed lucrative match race between Johnson and Lewis.
"I will never allow it to happen," Primo Nebiolo, president of the International Amateur Atheltic Federation, said Sunday.
A NEW CAST Johnson, 28, has passed at least four drug tests during his suspension.
He has been an outspoken opponent of drug use and has spent the last year speaking to children, warning them against performance-enhancing drugs.
Many of those around Johnson have changed, too.
However, it was Futerman who offered to permit a British journalist to interview Johnson -- if he paid $10,000 and submitted his questions in advance.
Johnson gave an in-depth interview to the German magazine, Sport, but only after being paid.
Other than that, he has had a low profile.
He still is awaiting word from the Canadian Olympic Assn., which placed a lifetime ban on Johnson that prohibited him from representing Canada in the Olympic Games.
That may go a long way to easing Johnson back into a sport that disowned him almost as swiftly as he burst on the scene.
Any trace of them in their former countries disappeared.
Similarly, Johnson was erased from track and field's record books.
The IAAF voted last September to adopt the controversial "Ben Johnson Rule" allowing the IAAF Council to decertify an athlete's records, titles and results if he or she later is shown to have used a banned substance before those performances.
Even though Johnson admitted to having taken drugs since 1981, the rule carries a six-year statue of limitations.
The question remains, is Ben Johnson capable of running at that brilliant level again?
If the public will pay to watch Johnson is another question.
Said Lumpp of the Meadowlands, "You don't have just a track and field story here, you have a human interest story.
Here's a person who has reached the top of everything, lost it all, and now he's coming back to run.
I don't know, but people are willing to find out."
