Introduction: Central American and Caribbean governments are awaiting with more thanpassing interest an imminent US statement on measures to cushion theeconomic dislocation which the region expects from the North American FreeTrade Agreement.
However, Washington's proposals, promised by Mr Alexander Watson, assistantsecretary of state for inter-American affairs, are likely to disappointCaribbean basin governments which have been seeking a comprehensive packageto allow free access to the US and Canadian markets.
Claiming that a more competitive Mexico, with free access to the US andCanada, will capture markets which Caribbean basin countries have developedunder current trade agreements, the region has asked for 'parity' withMexico in exporting to Nafta signatories.
During this time they would havethe opportunity of negotiating their future trade relationship with theNafta signatories, with the option of seeking membership either asindividual states or as a group.
We are heartened by President Salinas' assurancesthat it is not Mexico's intention to take investments away from theCaribbean.
'There is yet no indication of what the US administration will propose forthe Caribbean basin.
While willing togive parity to a few products, the US wanted the Caribbean basin countriesto meet new conditions, including bilateral investment treaties,intellectual property rights agreements, workers' rights and environmentallegislation, democracy, good governance and accountability, Mr Carringtonsaid.
'In presenting their case for parity, Caribbean leaders have argued that theUS and Canada will also be the losers if there is extensive economicdislocation in the region caused by a loss of markets to Mexico.
'Each Dollars 1bn of US exports to the region creates 20,000 new jobs in theUS,' he said. '
'Currently 60 cents of every dollar earned by the Caribbean returns to theUS through the purchase of US goods, compared with only 10 cents for eachdollar spent by Asia.
'The Nafta playing field will never be level for the region,' he said.
