Introduction:Senate Democrats promised today to scrutinize Supreme Court nominee ClarenceThomas' views on abortion and other divisive issues.
But Republicans said heshould not divulge his feelings about controversies that might come before thecourt.
"I'm satisfied that this man will pass muster," President Bushdeclared Monday in naming Thomas to succeed retiring Justice ThurgoodMarshall.
But Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, said the Senate Judiciary Committee, inconfirming four justices without learning how they felt about abortion, has"given them a free ride" and should be tougher in ferreting out Thomas'views.
Arlen Specter, R-Pa., noted that Metzenbaum did not pressJustice David Souter during confirmation hearings about his position onabortion.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said on NBC's "Today" showthat "literally nobody nominated for the Supreme Court should give his or herviews with regard to cases that might come up in the future.
"But Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., said "in the past few months alone the Supreme Court isthrowing out past decisions, and I think it is legitimate to ask Judge Thomas,what do you think of settled law, like Roe vs. Wade (legitimatizing abortion),what do you think of a woman's right to privacy, free speech issues, issues offreedom of religion.
"The fact that he is an African-American should not be a basis for avoidingvery careful scrutiny of his civil rights record," said Julius L. Chambers,director of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund.
SenateMajority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine; and Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass.,all promised a thorough review of the nomination.
Confirmation hearingsare expected to begin after Congress' August recess.
Anunabashed conservative, he would succeed the court's leading liberal -- andfirst and only black justice.
Potential opponents of the nominee promised in their statements to ignoreThomas' race when they examine his record.
On a number ofoccasions Thomas has expressed objections to racial quotas.
turned thestatutes on their heads by requiring discrimination in the form of hiring andpromotion quotas, so-called goals and timetables.
"In a 1987 article forthe Yale Law &amp; Policy Review he referred to affirmative action as "socialengineering.
"Thomas declined to answer questions abouthis legal views until his hearings.
