Introduction: Egypt honored its slain parliament speakerand four security men today with a state funeral led by agrim-looking President Hosni Mubarak.
He was the firstEgyptian politician assassinated since Islamic extremists shotPresident Anwar Sadat at a military parade nine years ago.
He said the perpetrators possibly belonged to thePalestinian extremist faction led by Abu Nidal.
Hundreds of red-bereted military police and white-uniformedpolicemen sealed off all streets leading to the mosque where thereligious service was held.
They also lined the funeral processionroute, as did hundreds of plainclothes security men.
Mubarak, wearing a black suit and sunglasses, and BritishForeign Secretary Douglas Hurd, on a two-day official visit, werein the front row of about 1,000 mourners.
They included relativesof the dead, government officials and foreign diplomats.
Behind them were four military jeeps carrying coffins of thefour security men, draped in the red, white and black Egyptianflag.
A caisson bearing el-Mahgoub's coffin followed, also wrapped inthe flag.
Relatives of the dead then lined up to acceptcondolences from Mubarak and other mourners.
Interior Minister Abdel-Halim Moussa had warned days earlier ofsuch an attack.
He said authorities arrested alleged saboteurs whowere entering the country with orders from Iraqi President SaddamHussein to assassinate Egyptian officials.
The state-owned newspaper Al-Ahram, quoting police sources,reported Monday that local Moslem extremists were collaboratingwith Palestinian terrorists sent to the country by Iraq on sabotagemissions.
Recent reports said Abu Nidal'sFatah-Revolutionary Council recently moved its headquarters fromLibya to Iraq.
Police ordered a state of alert at airports to keep theassailants from fleeing and set up security checkpoints along Cairobridges.
El-Mahgoub's authority extended solely over the 458-seatParliament, which he had headed since 1984.
He was not active inthe gulf crisis, Al-Ahram noted in a front-page editorial today.
We don't have anyindication at this time who was responsible or what their purposeswere,'' he said.
