development organizations are finding that some ofthe world's poorest entrepreneurs repay their debts at ratesapproaching 100%.
To encourage grass-roots private businessin Latin America, Asia and Africa, these organizations areexpanding programs that already lend thousands of thesestruggling entrepreneurs amounts ranging from $50 to severalhundred dollars.
Tiny Third World businesses commonly repay these"microloans" faithfully because they crave the security of afavorable credit rating.
This rescues them from the clutchesof loan sharks -- microloans typically charge the prevailinglocal commercial loan rate -- and lets them borrow again inhard times.
Their repayment performance shines when compared with thatof many sovereign nations.
Though microlending has been around for years, it is nowbooming.
Ms. Romanow cites the case of Aaron Aguilar, an unemployedfactory worker in Monterrey, Mexico, who borrowed $100 to buyclay and glazes for making figurines with his wife in theirback yard.
Sometimes borrowers have to struggle against setbacks thatmight seem comical in the prosperous West.
One group of womenin Cameroon received $100 from New York agency Trickle Up tostart a rabbit-breeding business, but the rabbit ate heroffspring, recalls Mildred Leet, co-founder of the U.S.agency.
Some Third World commercial banks are taking note of poorentrepreneurs' repayment rates.
Isaac Btesh, a director and son ofthe founder, says the bank has lent $80,000 to 100 people sofar on 60-day, rotating lines of credit -- with a 100%repayment rate.
"Poverty lending has such promise that Multi Credit plansto make it the bank's number one activity, ahead of tradefinancing, consumer loans and merchant loans, the officialadds.
Accion, a Cambridge, Mass.-based nonprofit internationaldevelopment group and a leader in the U.S. microloanmovement, says it plans to increase its microlending thisyear to $66.5 million from $37.8 million in 1990 and $9.8million five years ago.
"There's energy and creativity outthere, people bootstrapping who aren't waiting for the nexthandout," says Larry Frankel of CARE.Trickle Up, which makes thousands of $100 loans annually,says its budget rose to $1 million this year from $800,000 in1989 after doubling almost every year throughout the 1980s.
Betsy Campbell, economic-development manager of Westport,Conn.-based Save the Children, says her group underwent ashift in the 1980s "from being primarily a charitableorganization" to being one oriented towards helpingprofit-making activities.
"These people value accessto credit so highly that default isn't really a problem," shesays.
Some Third World banks, notably in Asia, have been makingmicroloans for years.
However, most such banks were set upwith state support specifically to target the poor.
Not every charity group in the U.S. has joined themicroloan bandwagon.
The Christian Children's Fund ofRichmond, Va., sticks to relief efforts and toperson-to-person sponsorships, in which a U.S. donor makesregular payments to an impoverished Third World child, forexample, while Africare House in Washington, D.C., focuses onhelping cooperatives improve food production and health care.
Nor is the booming field of microlending without itsdetractors -- or its controversies.
David Munro, an officialwith TechnoServe of Norwalk, Conn., says he prefers to work"on a larger scale, and I also don't see {microlending} aspassing on much in the way of skills.
"And officials at the U.S. Agency for InternationalDevelopment, which finances a big chunk of many privategroups' overseas operations, say they support the principleof expanding poverty lending but oppose congressional effortsto mandate minimum levels.
AID has more than doubled itsmicro-enterprise budget, which includes microlending,training and other activities, to an estimated $114 millionthis year from $58 million in 1988.
