The conditions are familiarto South Bay firefighters, who know they may be no more than a careless matchaway from a blaze as intense and unpredictable as the one that devastated theOakland hills last Sunday.
Now, in the wake of that firestorm, local firefighters are looking up atthe hills that surround this area and wondering not whether, but only when andwhere.
"I know it's there," said Saratoga Fire Chief Ernest Kraule.
It's in the mountain communities thatstraddle Highway 9 in Santa Cruz County, isolated by weak bridges that won'tsupport some firetrucks and connected by a two-lane road that will hinderescape.
It's in Los Altos Hills, where residents in 1984 repealed anordinance requiring fire-retardant roofs; a year later, a fire destroyed 100acres and 12 homes, many of which have been rebuilt -- with the same flammableshake roofs.
Stateofficials say it's no coincidence that six of California's 10 most damagingwildfires have occurred since 1980.
"The tendency is to have bigger firesthat are much more expensive to put out, with much more property loss," saidRoy Pike, a deputy chief in the California Department of Forestry and FireProtection's Santa Rosa office.
Privacy's high priceHaving pushed intothese areas, city dwellers don't understand that the wooded seclusion andnatural beauty exact a cost in fire protection, rescue workers complain.
Instead of an eight- or10-inch water main ensuring pressure for fire hoses, the mountains are lacedwith two-inch pipes.
Take the 1985 fire above Lexington Reservoir, which blazed for sixdays, scorching nearly 14,000 acres and destroying 42 homes.
"Codes rarely enforced;  In the hills, nearly every home is surrounded by thick brush or dense woods.
Fire codes require residents to keep the trees 30 feet from their homes, butfire officials admit they rarely enforce them.
Instead, as they drive by, somefirefighters make mental notes about which homes would be worth saving.
By nottrimming dense brush, he said, some homeowners are "virtually signing a deathwarrant.
"And increasingly, fire officials worry about wildfires spreadinginto even more heavily populated areas at the base of the foothills, wherenumerous trees create an "urban forest.
But, often, thatmeans firefighters have to overcome narrow roads, weak bridges, inadequatewater pressure and gridlock from fleeing residents.
"An estimated 25,000 people live inthe communities along Highway 9 between Santa Cruz and Boulder Creek, thecurvy, two-lane road that would be the only way out in the case of a majorfire.
Ed Ekers, chief of the Santa Cruz city fire department, worriesabout sending his trucks through "a tunnel of fire" if flames were ever tospread across the canopy of trees above Highway 9.Will there be water?Even if they can reach a blaze, firefighters know there may not be any waterto fight it.
That could happen even in urbanized areas of Santa Clara Countybecause the major water suppliers rely on a similar system of electric pumpsto maintain water pressure in the foothills.
In the east foothills and southern SantaClara County, homeowners have to provide only 5,000 gallons for firefighting,barely enough for five minutes at the rate some firetrucks pump.
To MikeBalesteri, chief of the forestry department ranger unit in Santa Clara County,the lesson is simple: "It's either bring your own water or find your own waterin our game.
"Taps would go dry quicklyEven when rural communities haveupgraded their water systems -- as Redwood Estates did -- firefighters say thetaps would start to run low if three or four houses were burning at once.
Local officials say they try to limit fire hazards largely by restrictingdevelopment in the hills.
But many of the most dangerous areas were built longbefore modern planning ordinances and building codes.
