Introduction: A colossal tunneling machineis boring beneath the English Channel from the white cliffs ofDover, pursuing a dream born in Napoleon's time that is coming trueat last.
For continental Europeans, accustomed to long-distance railtravel, the tunnel is but a small spur on a vast network stretchingto Moscow and beyond.
Some wonder whether Britain will beready for it.
``People still question whether the tunnel will be complete inMay 1993 and that's ridiculous,'' says Kathy Watson, co-author of abook on the project.
``They're still arguing about whether it willintroduce rabies into this country, or let in terrorists.''
``They discuss it in terms of their being an island race, with achannel that has kept out invaders,'' she said in an interview.
Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium that will own thetunnel, is urging British Rail to speed its plans.
Critics say thetangle of commuter lines in southeast England, so obsolete thattrains can be delayed by a sudden fall of autumn leaves, will delaytunnel traffic.
The consortium forecasts 16.5 million passengers in 1993 but therailroad says that figure will not be reached before 1998.
Napoleon wanted to bore a tunnel in 1802 but Britain's generalswarned him off.
Digging began in 1882 but was halted by Britishfears of French invasion through the tunnel.
With trade barriers among the 12 EEC countries set to fall in1992, Colin Kirkland, technical director of Eurotunnel's on theBritish side, says the tunnel will be completed this time.
He says the entire cost of 5.2 billion pound ($8.8 billion)project is privately financed and cancellation would cost thegovernments ``enormous penalties'' to shareholders.
``There's no way that politicians will cancel this project,''Kirkland said in an interview.
Money's power to move the tunnel forward was demonstrated inAugust, when drilling fell behind schedule.
The timetable calls for 650 feet a week and Kirkland is confidentof reaching it.
At its peak, the project will employ about 11,000 workers and 11tunneling machines.
Construction of the two one-way train tunnels begins inDecember.
A smaller service tunnel running between them now isbeing dug.
Tunneling machines simultaneously dig, remove rock and put uptunnel walls.
With a laser beam to keep the driver on course, the700-foot-long behemoth creeps along, pressing curved slabs ofScottish granite and pulverized ash into the newly exposed tunnelwall.
Once theall-clear is given, the two-story-high rotating blade with itstungsten teeth resumes chewing ahead.
Because the machines are too large to be removed, when thedigging is complete they will be rolled aside and walled in.
Cars and trucks will drive onto the shuttle trains and be ableto stay in their vehicles or stroll about during the 35-minutetunnel passage.
