But Thomas, who has risen in Republican ranks as an advocate of bootstrapconservatism, would present a striking change from Marshall, a civil-rightspioneer and an anchor of the court's declining liberal faction.
Thomas,barely half the age of the man whose seat he was named to fill, came of age inthe world that Marshall helped create.
While not much is known about Thomas' views on most issues likely to comebefore the court, he has made clear his opposition to affirmative action andto policies that can be viewed as incorporating quotas or racial preferences.
Opposes affirmative actionIn his year as a federal appeals court judge ,he has not ruled on affirmative action, but he has long been outspoken intaking the position that government affirmative-action programs are not onlyunwise but unconstitutional.
However, in other respects, this nominationis very much a wild card both for conservatives who jumped instantly toembrace it and for liberals whose responses ranged from cautious to hostile.
Those views may well remain unknown through a confirmation processthat may be contentious but that in the end is not likely to derail thenomination.
Justice William Brennan wrote that decision a few weeks before he retiredfrom the court.
The views of Justice David Souter,Brennan's successor, remain largely unknown.
Views on big issues unknown; Thomas' views on the other major issues remain unknown, although the 1990confirmation hearing for his seat on the Court of Appeals was widely viewed onCapitol Hill and in ideological interest groups as a rehearsal for a SupremeCourt nomination.
Abortion faction speaks out"The Souter model of silence and evasion that wesaw last year is absolutely unacceptable," said Kate Michelman, executivedirector of the National Abortion Rights Action League.
Her reference wasto Souter's confirmation hearing last September, during which the nomineegracefully but firmly deflected questions on abortion.
Sen. HowardMetzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat who serves on the Judiciary Committee, endorsedMichelman's position.
"I'm through reading tea leaves and voting in thedark," he said.
Rights groups cautiousCivil rightsgroups took a cautious tone Monday, essentially noting "concerns" and sayingthey would study the record.
"We urge the Senate not to rush to judgment,"said a statement from a Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, an umbrellagroup of 185 organizations that took an early and leading role in the defeatof the Bork nomination.
Introducing his nominee to the country at atelevised news conference Monday, Bush drew on the powerful appeal of Thomas'life story as a self-motivated and self-made success.
"Judge Thomas' lifeis a model for all Americans," Bush said.
At his side stood a black manwho was 5 years old when Marshall won his Supreme Court argument in Brown vs.the Board of Education and who was a college freshman when Marshall joined theSupreme Court.
Wellbefore Bush presented Thomas to the country Monday, it was clear that thatchapter in the court's history is largely closed and that a new page was aboutto be turned.
After Monday's nomination, some -- but by no means all -- of theblanks on that page have been filled in.
from Holy Cross College, 1971; J.D.from Yale Law School, 1974.Career:; 1974-'77: assistant attorneygeneral, state of Missouri; 1977-'79: attorney, Monsanto Co.1979-'81: legislative assistant to Sen. John Danforth, R-Mo.1981-'82:assistant secretary for civil rights, Education Department; 1982-'90:chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; 1990-: U.S.Circuit Court of Appeals for District of Columbia; Source: Who's Who AmongBlack Americans; WHAT'S NEXT?Now that President Bush has nominated ClarenceThomas to the Supreme Court , the next step is up to the Senate.
TheSenate Judiciary Committee is expected to begin confirmation hearings inSeptember, after the August recess.
