Introduction: In the late 1970s, poor farmers living in communities surrounding this small town began replacing their fields of cacao and coffee with coca to meet the growing U.S. demand for cocaine.
Like thousands of other farmers in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, they discovered that while cacao and coffee could give their families enough to eat, coca could make them rich.
Lately, someone else has been attracted by its big profits: the country's murderous guerrillas, the Shining Path.
But the guerrillas have discovered they can easily win support among farmers in the jungles of Upper Huallaga because of widespread anger generated by the U.S.-financed Peruvian anti-drug campaign.
This effort focuses on interdicting drug trafficking and eradicating coca plants.
While Washington has been quick to trumpet links between guerrillas and drug trafficking in other countries, U.S. officials downplay the connection between drugs and the Shining Path.
One reason is embarrassment that the U.S.-financed anti-drug effort may have pushed coca growers closer to the guerrillas.
But more important, if it were admitted that guerrillas are in large numbers in the Upper Huallaga, the army might again be given emergency control over the zone.
During this period, the army had virtual dictatorial control over all military and nonmilitary operations in the region.
Government officials from the anti-drug police (UMOPAR) and the coca-eradication unit (CORAH) sent into the region to wipe out drug production were often confined to their barracks by the army; they simply were not allowed to carry on with their work.
Anti-drug police, Upper Huallaga residents and Interior Ministry officials report that army officers received hundreds of thousands of dollars in payoffs from drug lords for their help in keeping anti-drug officials at bay.
When new President Alan Garcia lifted the state of emergency, the army lost any ability it may have had to protect coca growers.
But the narcos have now entrenched themselves in the towns of Tocache and Uchiza, where the police have repeatedly been blocked from entering by armed residents.
At the same time, farmers are now planting coca in rugged parts of the jungle, far from CORAH's sweep.
In return for their protection, the guerrillas demand that farmers turn over one-fifth of their coca crop, according to UMOPAR officers, farmers and priests.
But residents insist that the rebels operate as a de facto government in the zone, even in Aucayacu and Tulumayo, where the police and army have outposts.
An important guerrilla activity is organizing community self-defense groups against the hated police.
Twenty-nine CORAH workers have been murdered in the valley since 1984, and it's likely that the Shining Path will encourage this kind of violence.
As part of its efforts to impart revolutionary "justice" among the people, the Shining Path has administered brutal reprisals against those peasants who do not fit its "new-man" profile.
The rebels are also believed responsible for the murders of four homosexual men last November in Aucayacu.
The guerrillas are held responsible for assassinating six mayors in the area since 1985, including two mayors from Aucayacu, which has 3,500 residents.
This is the Catch-22 that now confounds Peruvian and U.S. officials trying to eradicate both drugs and guerrillas from Peru.
