Introduction: This has always been a land of stark contrasts and magnificent subtleties, never more so than in the aftermath of last summer's spectacular season of fire which scorched enough timber and meadow to rival Rhode Island in size.
But cut into the green are huge gashes of once-thriving forest that now appear either pitch black or rusty brown, depending on whether the trees were roasted or merely singed.
Once-lush hillsides are now covered by little more than the skeletons of stately lodgepole pines.
Their needles, twigs and even limbs gone up in smoke, some of these "widowmakers," as loggers call them, still jut precariously from the charred dirt.
Others lay scattered across the ground like giant pick-up-sticks.
Down at ground level, the same scenery is a thing of beauty, not devastation, to the eyes of soil scientist Henry Shovic.
He turns a spade of blackened earth and finds rich brown soil just beneath the crust, a sign that the forest not only remains fertile but will soon be teeming with new life.
Already, clumps of grasses are beginning to jut to the surface and here and there a yellow buttercup or purple shooting star has also broken through.
It is sure to leave its mark on future fire and management policies not just at Yellowstone but throughout the vast system of national parks and wilderness areas.
The debate has also served to underscore a basic conflict in the mission of national parks as set out by Congress.
On the one hand, they are supposed to be preserves of the past, the last outposts in America where nature is allowed to take its course with as little intrusion as possible from man.
Tied to Neighbors But "parks can no longer be considered ecological and sociological islands," Agee told a conference of conservationists here over the weekend.
"They are inextricably tied to their neighbors for better or worse."
Some movement in that direction may already be under way.
The Interior Department, parent of the National Park Service, has already ordered a summer-long moratorium on its politically sensitive "let-burn" policy, under which lightning-triggered blazes are allowed to burn unless they threaten human lives or property.
The edict applies to all but two parks in Florida. "
With the exception of Big Cypress and the Everglades, we will be in full suppression mode," a park service spokesman explained.
Under the changes, expected to be announced shortly by Bush Administration officials, all parks would have to run through a safety check list that includes an assessment of weather, moisture, winds and available firefighting crews before they could make a decision on whether or not to let a lightning fire burn.
Leading environmentalists are cautiously optimistic about the new plan because it retains at least a stated commitment to the retention of so-called "natural" policies.
At the same time, however, they warn that saddling park managers with extensive conditions could effectively result in quick suppression of all wildfires.
May Become Gun-Shy Michael Scott, regional director of the Wilderness Society, said restrictions could lead to a "systematic politicization of ecosystem management" and make officials gun-shy about letting fire burn for any reason.
"They're going to say 'we better just put out the fires,' " Scott predicted.
"There could be a chilling effect on allowing nature to take its course."
Heeding complaints that fires were getting out of hand and could threaten surrounding communities, officials suspended the policy by mid-July.
And some of last year's most destructive blazes were triggered by man, not nature, and fought from the first sign of smoke.
"What is most humbling is that one-quarter inch of rain and snow on Sept. 11 essentially stopped what the greatest firefighting effort in history could not," argued John Varley, Yellowstone's chief scientist.
And many people who live in nearby resort communities remain bitter over what they contend was a preventable tragedy that could scare away tourists and imperil their livelihoods.
"If (park superintendent) Barbee were here I'd choke him to death even today," said Betty Morton, a motel owner in tiny Cooke City, where the threat of fire forced a temporary evacuation last September.
"Even a 5-year-old child knows if something's burning you got to stop it quick.
All that stuff about burning's good for growth is a crock.
I'll never see any of it in my lifetime."
Will Keep Job While many critics have called for Barbee's head, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. said in an interview that the Yellowstone superintendent was in no danger of losing his job.
Still, Lujan, a former New Mexico congressman appointed to his Cabinet post only this year, said park officials should have "admitted" that they erred in losing control of the blazes.
To a great extent, lingering resentment over the conduct of firefighting efforts is fueled by economic uncertainty.
Morton, for example, said all 12 of the cabins she rents out are usually reserved for the Memorial Day weekend weeks in advance.
This year, only one of the rooms has been taken so far.
However, Marsha Karle, a spokeswoman for the park, said letters and calls logged by Yellowstone operators are about double their usual pace and the number of visitors entering the park so far this spring has been well above normal.
The park has embarked on an unprecedented publicity drive as well as an $8.5-million rehabilitation project to reassure reluctant tourists that it has not been transformed into a bleak wasteland.
A new $250,000 exhibit on fire ecology is under construction, as is a series of wayside exhibits describing various fire scenes.
Expect Many Scientists While the response from tourists is still questionable, the park is bracing for an unprecedented onslaught of scientists looking into everything from fire behavior patterns to its effects on grizzly bears, fisheries, grasslands and the nesting status of bald eagles.
"Hundreds of people are here doing research," said Karle.
Colorful souvenir books detailing the fires in words and pictures are big sellers at curio shops both in the park and gateway communities.
Yellowstone -- The Place Where Hell Bubbled Up," comes in both 90-minute deluxe and 30-minute highlight packages as well as a Japanese narrative version.
Yellowstone officials are making no apologies for their handling of the fires, which they contend was not only ecologically sound but also in concert with then existing park service regulations.
"There was no ecological downside to the fires," Barbee said recently. "
The media, in my opinion, went into a frenzy.
Lujan's reservations aside, an internal government review has largely backed up the approach taken by Barbee and other park officials in dealing with the fires.
But it did fault the park service for a haphazard public relations job that fueled confusion.
Natural, Beneficial Another major post-fire study, this one conducted by a panel of experts from several major universities, has yet to be released.
Ecologists are in total agreement that wildfires were a natural part of the primeval North American landscape," Christensen testified. "
Christensen said that there is ample evidence that such fires kill few animals and ultimately improve their habitat by promoting the growth of plants and shrubs that could not thrive in the gloom of a thick forest.
Here is how reforestation process takes place after logging or a fire: Stage 1- Lodgepole pine saplings grow in stands before forming canopy (up to 40 years after a fire).
Stage 2- Closed canopy of even-aged, usually dense young trees (40 to 100 years).
Stage 5- Canopy, dominated by over-mature lodgepole pines, beginning to break up (over 300 years).
