Just as prospects brighten for the beleaguered "chunnel,"Britain risks failing to take full advantage of thecross-channel link.
Sarah Talbot-Williams, a spokeswoman for the Confederationof British Industry , Britain's main employers' group says,"1992 is going to produce a much more competitive market. "
"Long plagued by soaring costs and drilling delays, thetunnel now looks set to open on time in June 1993.
Britishdiggers, who once lagged months behind schedule, currentlyare just one week behind; their French counterparts arerunning three months ahead of plan.
And although theproject's estimated cost has soared to #7.66 billion ($13.11billion) from #4.9 billion, tunnel executives have obtainedunderwriting for an equity rights offer and preliminaryagreement for more bank loans to cover the added cost.
"But the lack of a high-speed rail link to London, andimproved service beyond, means Britain may miss out on thetunnel's total benefits.
"There is a danger of not being ableto exploit the tunnel to its full potential," says Prof.Christopher Nash, a transport expert at Leeds University inNorthern England.
He said British Rail, which owns 50% ofthe consortium, would consider other options for a fast-raillink.
But no one expects a viable scheme anytime soon.
As a result of Thursday's decision, the journey time toLondon from Paris will be about three hours -- 30 minuteslonger than with a high-speed rail link.
"The traffic will now speed through as far as our side ofthe tunnel, and then the men with red flags will lead it onto London," complains Keith Speed, a Conservative member ofParliament whose constituency is near the tunnel terminal.
"We make more money on road traffic using our tunnel," Mr. Morton says.
"There is in no sense a feeling we must havethat link to make the tunnel successful.
"But Mr. Morton admits he wants to see the high-speed linkbuilt, professing it would divert traffic from southeastEngland's clogged roads.
"Some analysts go further, arguing the tunnel indeed needsbetter rail links if it is to compete with improving ferryand air services. "
A high-speed link which covers {only} partof the route proves to be fairly uncompetitive with othertransportation modes," says Bill Steinmetz, vice president oftransport for consultants Booz-Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc. inLondon.
"The Channel Tunnel is a marvelous addition to theinfrastructure," says David Merrill, corporate-affairsdirector at Pilkington PLC, the big glass maker based in St. Helens in Northwest England.
But "it's important that thequality of the rail network and capacity is improved.
