While it's true themost visible term limit advocates are right of center, themovement is picking up many prominent liberal and Democraticsupporters.
Certainly the polls show that term limits areoverwhelmingly popular with Americans regardless of income,party, race or sex.
Last month's Wall Street Journal/NBC Newspoll showed Americans back term limits by 75% to 21%nationwide.
Martin Plissner, political director for CBS News, sayshe has "never seen an issue on which there was so littledemographic variation.
"One reason is that term limits would open up politics tomany people now excluded from office by career incumbents.
Most ofthe authors of Washington state's term limit are liberalDemocrats who want to break up "the old-boy network."
One ofthe authors, Sherry Bockwinkel, says "You won't see whiteincumbents hanging on to districts that long ago becamelargely minority.
She thinks termlimits will give women more opportunities in politics; herGOP opponent refused to support federal term limits.
Ben Nighthorse Campbell, the only American Indian inCongress, backed a term limit measure last year thatrestricted his own tenure.
Term limits for Congress have been supported by some ofhistory's most prominent Democrats.
"I saw incumbents spend their timefund-raising and worrying about how to stay in office.
He notes both groups opposed termlimits in his home state; the California initiative includedbudget cuts that retired more than 700 legislative staffers.
Other former Democratic governors who favor term limitsinclude Vermont's Madeleine Kunin and Colorado's RichardLamm.
"While many prominent Democrats support term limits, party"apparatchiks" are dead set against them.
Intimidation like that has slowed support for term limitsamong Democratic officeholders, but there are exceptions.
AnnRichards says she "would be glad" to sign a bill limitingcongressional and legislative terms.
Journalists are under fewer constraints than electedofficials in expressing enthusiasm for term limits.
ColumnistEllen Goodman says "We have to learn once again that idealpublic service is, by definition, temporary."
She thinks thecurrent Congress proves "the politically privileged class hasbecome more isolated than experienced.
The liberal Seattle Times,Washington state's largest newspaper, stunned its readers byendorsing term limits.
In April, it denounced term limits as "thelatest anti-government fad to sweep the country."
Calaway was also chairman of the national DemocraticParty's $15 million "Victory Fund" in 1988.
He says termlimits would mean "we're governed by citizens who go homeafter their service and not permanent, elitist people whonever leave office."
David Osborne, who became sort of aguru for neo-liberals with his book "Laboratories ofDemocracy," speaks for many reform-minded liberals when hesays, "Term limits are necessary to shake things up anddisrupt the careerist mindset that leads to so much cowardicein elected officials.
"While Speaker Tom Foley reacts to term limits the way thatLinus in the comic strip "Peanuts" would if his securityblanket were taken away, some House Democrats think hisconcern that term limits would result in large GOP gains inCongress is a fantasy.
Indeed, the Democratic Party couldactually be helped by term limits, according to formerOklahoma state legislator Cleta Mitchell, a self-described"liberal feminist" who works with the Denver-based term limitgroup Americans Back in Charge.
"Democrats must offer votersmore than the simple powers of incumbency," she says.
"No one suggests the drive to enact term limits will beeasy -- especially in states that ban voter initiatives.
Butthere are already signs that business lobbies, labor unionsand other term limit opponents are relying more on convincingjudges -- starting with Florida's heavily politicized stateSupreme Court -- to overturn state term limits than on tryingto convince voters to reject the idea.
