Introduction: Rescuers crawled through collapsed homesand shops today looking for more victims of a tornado that carved a3-mile stretch of destruction, killing 17 people, injuring 463 andleaving 1,000 homeless.
``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in ablender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker BobCaraway, whose specialty is cave rescues.
He was among those calledout to help dig through rubble for survivors or the bodies of thedead.
The tornado was one of a series that touched down Wednesday inan arc spanning at least seven states from the Deep South to theMidwest.
The other tornadoes caused at least 19 injuries andfar-flung property damage.
In Huntsville, teams with cranes and floodlights searched forthe injured or dead, hampered by wind-whipped rain and temperaturesthat plummeted overnight from 73 degrees into the 30s.
Guy Hunt sent 50 National Guardsmen to help and said hewould view damage Friday.
His spokesman, Terry Abbott, said aerialsurveys indicate the twister hopped along a 25-mile path, much ofit straight through Huntsville.
In Pennsylvania, the weather service said it receivedunconfirmed reports of a tornado that turned over a car and knockeddown trees and power lines near Gettysburg.
_ Tornadoes caused minor property damage in Mississippi, Kentuckyand Indiana.
_ In West Virginia, high winds believed to be tornadoes sweptJefferson County early today, overturning trailers, blowing roofsoff homes and downing power lines, authorities said.
_ Heavy thunderstorms destroyed at least a dozen homes inAlorton, Ill., killing one person and injuring 20 others, fiveseriously, authorities said.
``It was fast,'' said Lucy Lee Rusk, whose apartment wasbattered by debris.
``It was like one big pop and that's wheneverything went.''
By then, it was already tearing up the city.
Huntsville Police Maj. Robert Moder said this morning that 463people were injured by the twister, which plowed through a schooland rural areas as well as a shopping mall and adjacent apartments.
She saidpolice had no firm reports of people missing.
No children in the school were killed, but about 30 youngsterswere in a kindergarten class at the building, and five werereported injured.
Most of the dead were in apartments, stores orcars.
Mayor Steve Hettinger estimated the number of homeless at 1,000and said officials were preparing a request for federal disasterassistance.
A worker at a building owned by the Madison County Jaycees said42 people were staying there early today, and described the mood ofthe survivors as ``shock, mostly, and disbelief.''
``They're thankful to be alive and they're thankful theirfamilies are alive,'' he said, adding that the shelter had receivedcalls from around the country from worried relatives.
Theroadway was strewn with used bandages and medical gloves left byemergency workers treating the injured.
Those in the tornado's path spoke with awe of its fury.
``It came in with a huge roar, an enormous amount of water, andit just started shaking and tearing at everything it could get holdof,'' said real estate broker Ike Carroll, who was in his car.
Heavy overhead power lines ``started snapping just like a circusperformer would snap his whip,'' Carroll said.
The city is home to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and theArmy's Redstone Arsenal, but no serious damage was reported fromthe space agency or weapons testing center.
Near Palmetto, Ga., resident Jeff Bryant said his home at theSweetbriar Mobile Home Park near Interstate 85 began to vibratewhen the twister approached.
``Then we heard a large, loud, swirling and humming noise,'' herecalled.
Itsounded more like a jet aircraft at very close range.''
Thomas Farr was driving on Interstate 85 when the tornado hit.``It was picking up cars and tossing them like toys off theinterstate,'' he said.
The car infront of us was flipped about 100 yards, and the guy was thrown outof his passenger window and landed 50 feet from his car.
