Introduction: An unqualified mate was piloting the Exxon Valdez -- violating both Coast Guard regulations and company policy -- when the tanker crashed into rocks, unleashing the worst oil spill in U.S. history, Exxon Shipping Co. said Sunday.
Exxon also disclosed that the Long Beach-bound tanker actually was involved in two separate accidents that night in pristine Prince William Sound.
Oil-Covered Birds, Otters Biologists already have counted 95 birds and two otters covered with oil but were unable to capture them for cleaning.
Killer whales, sea lions and ducks also have been spotted swimming in the muck.
Steve Cowper declared Prince William Sound a disaster area, freeing state resources for cleanup and paving the way for a federal disaster declaration.
Frank Iarossi, president of Exxon Shipping, told reporters that Capt.
The ship then "slid about two miles" under full power and hit more underwater rocks, Iarossi said.
At no time did the ship lose steering, he added.
"I agree something is missing," Iarossi told reporters and local residents at a press conference.
Puts Off Filing Charges "We're not going to file any charges until we are done with our investigation," said Coast Guard spokesman Todd Nelson.
"The Coast Guard may seem slow and plodding at times, but if we file charges, we're going to make them stick," he added.
Nelson said piloting a ship without proper certification is a civil, not criminal, violation, which ultimately could result in suspension or revocation of the captain's license.
The Coast Guard served subpoenas Saturday on the captain, helmsman and third mate to ensure that they make themselves available to investigators.
Experts from the International Bird Rescue Center in Berkeley, Calif., set up a rehabilitation center here Sunday in case oiled birds are captured.
Otter experts from Hubbs Marine Research Institute at Sea World in San Diego were due to arrive today.
But even if animals turn up in distress, rescues may not be feasible.
Fish and Wildlife Service said he felt encouraged about impact on the area's abundant marine life after patrolling the 50-square-mile slick by boat Saturday.
Another 1 million barrels remain aboard the damaged ship, but no new leakage has been reported.
Salvagers hope the two-year-old Exxon Valdez will be able to float free once its load is lightened.
No disciplinary action has been taken against any crew members, Iarossi said.
The executive promised to make public results of mandatory drug and alcohol tests on crew members.
So far, oil has washed ashore only on two tiny islands in the sound, and beach cleanup efforts were under way.
Hasn't Seen Plan "We have been told by Exxon that they will come up with an organized cleanup plan, but we've yet to see one," said Barbara Holian, spokeswoman for the state Department of Environmental Conservation.
At Coast Guard offices here, Nelson said such a move was unlikely. "
The Coast Guard doesn't have tons and tons of its own equipment, and it would have to hire the same people Exxon has," Nelson said.
Right now, Exxon is the oil company with the deep pockets, and it's cleaning up its own spill within federal guidelines."
