Many athletes accepted the accusation that Johnson used amuscle-building but dangerous and illegal anabolic steroid calledstanozolol as confirmation of what they said they know has beengoing on in track and field.
``Everybody uses drugs,'' said sprinter Horace Dove-Edwin ofSierra Leone.
Red-eyed and visibly distraught, Johnson's sister, Clare Rodneyin suburban Toronto, refused to believe the accusation.
``If you could cut him into a million pieces and test him overagain, my brother is not on drugs,'' she said.
In a middle-of-the-night meeting with Olympic and Canadianofficials, family members, coach and manager, Johnson, 26,forfeited his most prized possession, the medal he'd had in hishands for only three days.
``He appeared to be in a complete state of shock and notcomprehending the situation,'' said Canada's chief of mission,Carol Anne Letheren.
``Ben was not able to discuss or articulateanything at that moment ...
He was just not able to speak and itwas a very difficult moment for all of us.''
Once there, he made hisway through a crush of reporters without comment as some spectatorsapplauded.
In Canada, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said the scandal was a``personal tragedy for Ben and his family.
It's also a moment ofgreat sorrow for all Canadians.''
James Worrall, a Canadian member of the IOC, said Johnson ``hasbeen killed'' as an athlete.
He said the sprinter's once-favoredstatus as a hero to many sports fans in Canada, his native Jamaica,and around the world now will be tarnished.
Johnson's name will go down in Olympic history with otherathletes who lost their gold medals, such as decathlete Jim Thorpein 1912 because he played semi-pro baseball and swimmer Rick DeMontin 1972 because he took an asthma medicine.
Lewis did not gloat over his rival's fall.
``I feel sorry forBen and for the Canadian people,'' he said today.
After Saturday's race, though, Lewis had said he couldn'tunderstand how Johnson could run as fast as he did after lookingtired in qualifying heats.
Lewis has previously alleged widespreaddrug use in track and field.
