Introduction:   Lightning has set the West ablaze thissummer, and electricity is again surging through the nation'swildfire command post.
As nearly half the acreage afire burns within 150 miles,specialists in the logistics center marshal resources from aroundthe nation.
On Saturday, there were about 220,000 acres ablaze infour states, with 102,000 of them in Idaho and the rest in Oregon,California and Utah.
``Tell me when the airplane's got to leave and I'll have theteam on it ,'' coordinator Lynn Findley says into the phone cradledon his shoulder.
He hangs up, makes another call and arranges for a procurementexpert to fly from Atlanta to LaGrande, Ore. Another staff member fields a caller searching for a fireofficer called ``Joe Blow.''
``He spellshis name B-L-O-U-G-H.'' Others juggle as many as three of the constantly ringing phones,scanning computer terminals for personnel, airplanes, red chemicalretardant and gear.
``Obviously, firefighting on the line is stressful,'' said FireCenter spokesman Arnold Hartigan.
``But the support people aredealing with human life facing fire, which is inherentlydangerous.''
One storm laid down 2,000strikes an hour with little rain.
Then winds reaching 80 mph andtemperatures pushing triple digits whipped those spots into majorconflagrations.
Three-inch-thick burning branches blew up to two miles ahead ofthe main fires.
Flames swept over thousands of acres in severalhours' time, creating a smoky miasma around Idaho's capital city.
``Fortunately we don't work at this level all year,'' Hartigansaid.
``It would be unbearable if we had to do this 365 days ayear.''
The complex has taken on a military look.
National Guard troopsin camouflage fatigues march toward trucks for transportation tothe fire lines.
Smoke jumpers sit in the shade of a buildingwaiting for their next leap into 100-foot-tall ponderosa pines,laden with chainsaws or water pumps.
``We are definitely an assault organization,'' Hartigan said.``It's patterned after military operations because they work.
In the logistics center, specialists spin Lazy Susans with pinkand blue requisition forms as each plea from the fire line isanswered.
The requests are for airplanes, helicopters, axes and shovels,portable marine pumps, hoses, fresh fruit, disposable sleepingbags, soft drinks and, most important, manpower.
World War II Navy bombers _ PB-4Y2s and Neptunes _ are lined upon the flight deck, spattered with red retardant.
They fill upagain and again with thousands of gallons of ``slurry,'' afertilizer-based substance that stops fires cold.
After five dry summers, backcountry timber has a moisturecontent only slightly higher than kiln-dried lumber, andstrategists have settled in for a long campaign.
It will take fall rains and winter snow to douse many of thenation's fires.
``Everybody knows it's stressful, but they're not snapping ateach other.
