Introduction: The City Council today asked countyprosecutors to investigate the conduct of a white policeman who wassecretly filmed while he pushed an off-duty black policeman througha plate-glass window.
Curt Livesay, an assisant Los Angeles County district attorneyand head of the office's Special Investigations Division, will leadthe probe, said district attorney spokesman Andy Reynolds.
An NBC-TV news camera crew arranged to follow Jackson during thesting Saturday night.
``We've never been able to come forth before with enough evidence(of alleged police racism).
The police chief in Long Beach declined to comment pending aninvestigation.
``We will pursue it aggressively,'' said Long Beach City ManagerJames Hanklad.
Long Beach Mayor Ernie Kell said on NBC's ``Today'' show thismorning that he was disturbed by the videotape.
``I ... do not support racism or police brutality, nor do thevast majority of the citizens of Long Beach, and we're a caring,thinking community and it disturbed us very much to see the tape,''he said.
Long Beach, about 20 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, hasabout 450,000 people, including a sizeable black population.
The incident renewed calls for a citizen board to review thePolice Department.
The idea first was debated last year amidallegations of police brutality.
But Jackson's boss said the black officer was looking for trouble.
``I submit that if Mr. Jackson had stayed in the vehicle, as didthe driver, this incident would not have occurred,'' HawthornePolice Chief Kenneth R. Stonebraker said at a news conference Monday.
The 30-year-old Jackson, who has been on a stress-relateddisability leave from his Hawthorne job for 22 months, contends theincident is typical of a pattern of racism by white officers in theLos Angeles area.
Jackson alleges racist slurs and actions forced him from theHawthorne department.
He has a disability lawsuit pending, has filedracism complaints against the department and conducted a similarpersonal sting operation against Los Angeles police.
Jackson was riding as a passenger with Jeffrey Hill, a30-year-old off-duty state corrections officer, when they werepulled over allegedly for straddling lanes, which they denied.
Jackson got out after the car stopped and police approached.
Jackson complied, and moments later was pushed through aplate-glass store window.
``I already cooperated and told him he could search me,'' Jacksonsaid.
Jackson received support at a Monday night ceremony in LosAngeles commemorating King's birthday.
``I'm deeply concerned since it strikes me as a period whenpolice violence and excessive force is rampant,'' said MarkRidley-Thomas, executive director of the Southern ChristianLeadership Conference's Los Angeles chapter.
``I'm more so offended since the Hawthorne Police Department,which has no jurisdiction, is making judgment.''
