However, there is still turmoil in the diamond market,caused by uncertainty about Russian exports following 'leaks' of stones fromthat country outside its contract with the CSO.Consequently, Mr Hans Gastrow, general manager, says that this year Venetiawill process 4.3m tonnes of ore, 6.5 per cent below its capacity.
It is alsomining an area of lower grade ore, which has fewer diamonds in each tonne.
Mr Gastrow is giving no forecasts but all this implies that output will bewell below the 5.6m carats a year De Beers predicted Venetia would yield atfull production.
Last year the mine, building up rapidly, more than doubled output andprocessed 3.6m tonnes of ore to recover 4.96m carats.
Mr Gastrow says that, apart from the imposition of the CSO quota, Venetia'has made a remarkably smooth transition from construction to production'.This year will be a time of consolidation.
Nevertheless,Venetia originally was to have employed 870 and it now has 764.
The total has beenkept down here partly by highly automated process plant but also by 'fewerpeople employed just to see that other people are doing their jobs',according to Mr David Gadd-Claxton, ore extraction manager.
It isalso the country's biggest diamond mine and a major contributor of exportearnings.
The mine has also revitalised De Beers' production, as it is accounting forhalf the group's output in South Africa and replacing production from its100-year-old Kimberley mines, which are now fading away.
Venetia's success is strategically important to De Beers because, when itsoutput is added to that in Botswana and Namibia, it gives the group directcontrol over more than 50 per cent of world rough gem diamond output.
Thisprovides a major base for the CSO to work from and gives it a powerfulposition from which to negotiate with other producers in the diamond cartel.
Employees are bussedin from nearby towns for 12-hour shifts and then return to their families.
Here worn out equipment will be stockpiledand sold off when the mine closes.
