Introduction: The label "black conservative," now firmly affixed to Clarence Thomas' name,does not begin to tell the story of his life, an American story oftransformation.
Born barnyard poor in segregated Georgia, forsaken bytheir father, Thomas and his brother were reared by strict Bible-believinggrandparents who taught him to never say, "I can't."
Thomas and his brother made it in the white world.
Their sister, reared byan aunt, had four children and went on welfare.
In a hostile world, they taught himto rely on himself.
"I was raised to survive under thetotalitarianism of segregation," Thomas wrote in a paper for the HeritageFoundation, a conservative public policy institute in Washington.
"Those who attempt to capture the daily counseling,oversight, common sense and vision of my grandparents in a governmentalprogram are engaging in sheer folly.
Yet as Washington Post journalist JuanWilliams has pointed out, Thomas is firmly grounded in the black intellectualtradition of Booker T. Washington, who advocated education, self-reliance andmutual support as the principal means of advancement.
Hismother, Leola, 18 at the time, lived in a house that had no plumbing.
Before Thomas' second birthday, his father moved to the North and left thefamily behind.
Taken in by grandparentsAt age 7,Thomas was sent to live with his grandparents.
"He elaborated in the Heritage Foundation paper: "Of course, I thought mygrandparents were too rigid and their expectations were too high.
His grandfather, a Catholic, enrolled him in anall-black school run by the church.
On Monday, Thomas also made sure to thank"the nuns.
Other seminarians referred to him as the"black spot on a white horse."
Disgusted, he left at the end of his firstyear.
Flirts with 'black power'Thomas went on to attend Holy CrossCollege in Worcester, Mass.
He received his law degree from Yale University in1974.As a young lawyer, Thomas worked in the office of Missouri AttorneyGeneral John C. Danforth.
He later joined Monsanto Co. Thomas'introduction to Washington came in 1979.
In 1982, after a year as assistant education secretary forcivil rights, Thomas was named by President Reagan to lead the EqualEmployment Opportunity Commission.
His tenure at the commission, whichinvestigates discrimination complaints, was controversial.
Abandoning support for hiring goals andtimetables, Thomas focused on resolving thousands of individual discriminationcomplaints.
Hetook his seat on the appeals court in March 1990.Thomas, who lives insuburban Virginia, is married and has a son.
