A signal that relations between Yugoslavia and Slovenia might be reconsidered came this time from the Slovene capital.
This information has not been denied and, apart from that, it is the logical conclusion to a series of statements issued by Slovene politicians, which pointed to a change in relations toward Belgrade.
The announcement about the normalization of relations were also supported by information that an official Slovene delegation had arrived in Belgrade for this purpose, but it was stated that the details cannot yet be published since the matter is very delicate.
The FRY Ministry of Foreign Affairs is denying that any official Slovene delegation came to Belgrade.
It is stated that this is rather a visit of businessmen, since these contacts have not been interrupted.
It is assumed in the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs that Slovene businessmen might even be checking the atmosphere for possible political contacts, but there have been no official statements about it.
Yugoslav diplomats point out that Yugoslavia has not been officially recognized by Slovenia.
It is also true that Slovenia does not accept Yugoslavia on the international scene.
Yugoslav sources claim that Slovenia is becoming increasingly isolated because of its extreme policy toward Yugoslavia, so that this might be one of the reasons why it has decided to "soften" its attitudes toward Yugoslavia.
Official Belgrade has not forgotten "the extremist, anti-Serbian statements issued by Milan Kucan in Albania" or the moves made by Slovene statesmen who "instead of soothing the passions, stirred them up, always to Serbia's disadvantage."
After reporters remarked that this relatively negative attitude might negate the unofficial signal from Ljubljana, a Yugoslav diplomat said: "We do not think that there is only one opinion in Slovenia about Yugoslavia.
Diplomatic Pirouettes At that time the press carried statements made by Milan Kucan and Lojze Peterle that unquestionably represented a shift in policy toward Belgrade.
Kucan said that "Slovenia never had any conflict with Serbia," and Peterle that "Slovenia would be happy if the conditions for the removal of the sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro were fulfilled."
At the beginning of December 1993, Mr. Peterle, the Slovene minister of foreign affairs, made that attitude concrete in a letter to Warren Christopher, the U.S. secretary of state, in which he wrote: "A possible removal of the sanctions against Yugoslavia is being fully considered since the aims for which they were introduced have not been achieved....
In the focus of Serbian attention now are relations with Croatia, and as far as Slovenia is concerned, the official proposal for the normalization of relations has to be specified first.
[Box, p 7]Jovanovic: "Slovenia Must Excuse Itself"  " In order to enter the process of normalization of relations with Slovenia, certain conditions must be fulfilled first," Vladislav Jovanovic, FRY minister of foreign affairs, said in a statement for POLITIKA, and added: "First it is necessary for Slovenia to excuse itself for the rude and impertinent move it made a year ago in refusing the Yugoslav offer of recognizing Slovenia.
Apart from that, Slovenia must stop challenging the continuity of Yugoslavia as a state.
Slovenia made a mistake by insisting that the FRY be excluded from all international forums.
We are not bothered that Slovenia is an independent state.
That is why our surprise was great when the turnaround occurred.
Yugoslavia is interested in good relations with all of its neighbors -- old and new alike.
We cannot account for the hostility that they have shown toward Yugoslavia and toward the people who are living in this region now.
Official Slovenia should find ways and means to end this hostility.
We are, of course, interested in normal relations between Slovenia and Yugoslavia, but some prerequisites have to be fulfilled," Jovanovic concluded his statement.
