If such an inquiry reveals that brutality was involved, either misdemeanor or felony charges could be filed against the officer, he said.
The FBI has also been called in to determine whether the civil rights of the man who was arrested -- Don Jackson, a sergeant on administrative leave from the Hawthorne Police Department -- were violated during his altercation with two Long Beach officers on Pacific Coast Highway, spokesman Fred Reagan said.
He refused to say who had requested the federal investigation.
Jackson and Jeff Hill, an off-duty federal corrections officer, donned dirty old clothes and drove into Long Beach in a rented 12-year-old sedan Saturday night as the television crew followed behind in a van.
Full Tape Withheld While edited portions of the tape have been broadcast, Long Beach officials have said they need to see everything filmed by the NBC crew to move ahead with their own investigation of the incident.
A Long Beach assistant city attorney said his office is considering legal action to obtain the tapes.
Although Long Beach Mayor Ernie Kell told NBC's "Today Show" on Tuesday morning that the two police officers had been suspended, Police Chief Lawrence L. Binkley said that the officers, Mark Dickey and Mark Ramsey, will remain on duty at this stage of the investigation.
They have, however, been reassigned from patrol duty to the detective bureau, he said.
Kell admitted later Tuesday that he was in error in his "Today Show" comments, but said he would favor firing the officers if it is proved that they used brutal tactics in dealing with Jackson.
We need to find out what happened here and make sure it never happens again."
It is not unusual for the district attorney to look into allegations of police brutality, Livesay said, estimating that the office takes on four to six such cases a year.
In determining whether a police officer has used excessive force, prosecutors have to decide whether the officer acted "without lawful necessity" in assaulting or beating a suspect.
He declined to detail what would constitute unnecessary force, saying that it would be a "judgement call" by prosecutors based on the actions and statements of the police officers and suspects, and the injuries suffered.
Attorney Michael Hannon, who is representing the two officers, said Tuesday that he will contest any allegations of brutality.
He said the officers were "set up" by black activists intent on creating a scene with police.
On Monday, however, department officials stopped releasing that statement and said they would have no comment pending the outcome of their internal investigation.
A spokesman for the Police Misconduct Lawyer Referral Service, a nonprofit group that investigates citizen complaints against law enforcement agencies, said the televised tape makes it clear that Dickey pushed Jackson's head and right arm through the window.
Spokesman David Lynn maintained that Hill, the driver of the car, was not violating any traffic laws when he was stopped.
The group also complained that Dickey also used a string of obscenities in his conversation with Jackson, who was booked for suspicion of using offensive language, challenging an officer to fight and obstructing arrest.
He was released on his own recognizance pending a Jan. 25 court appearance.
"It's real hard to tell what's happening below the waist," said Councilman Evan Anderson Braude, maintaining that it is vital that NBC release the rest of its videotapes.
Concedes Error by Officer Attorney Hannon conceded that Dickey was wrong to spice his orders to Jackson with obscenities, but he said the cursing was evidence of discourtesy, rather than racism.
He said the two police officers become concerned for their safety when Jackson suspiciously exited the car as soon as it stopped, then immediately started arguing when Dickey ordered him to submit to a search for weapons. '
He said Jackson had an eye for the camera when he screamed as Dickey moved him over to the police cruiser for arrest.
He said Dickey, who has been on the police force for four years, had one earlier complaint about his conduct, which was investigated by the department and determined to be unfounded.
