``As the day heats up, you'll get these reburns going out and thetrees dry out and they'll torch,'' said Forest Service spokesman EdChristian in Wyoming.
``We hope Mother Nature cooperates with us,'' said Mary Plumb ofthe federal Bureau of Land Management in Utah.
That was Denver's fifthconsecutive day at 100 degrees or higher.
Fire crews were at work in Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico,Arizona, California and Washington.
Elsewhere, four big fires burnedin interior Alaska, one having charred an estimated 24,000 acres.
The Boise Interagency Fire Center in Idaho, which coordinatesfederal firefighting efforts, listed 7,000 to 7,500 people on thefire lines, along with 42 air tankers, 14 guide planes and 10helicopters, spokesman Arnold Hartigan said Saturday.
So far this fire season, the agency has had 31,000 firesreported, which have burned 1,117,000 acres.
In the same period lastyear, it had 54,000 fires but 765,000 acres burned.
The fact that there are more acres burned this year, but fewerfires, ``means this year's fires are in very rugged, inaccessibleterrain, which makes them hard to fight,'' said Hartigan.
``Also,some of them are in areas where there have not been any fires foryears, and that means there is excellent fuel available.''
It was 80 percent contained, but after a week of temperaturesaround 100 degrees, the National Weather Service predicted possibledry lightning storms and gusting wind.
High wind also was expected in northern California, where a2,500-acre fire near Janesville on the eastern slopes of the SierraNevada destroyed two mobile homes.
It just blew the fire and pushed itout,'' said Forest Service spokesman Dave Reider.
Spokesman Larry Lathrop said a helicopter battling the firecrashed Saturday about four miles southeast of Janesville.
The chopper apparently was making a waterdrop when it crashed.
In the Sierra foothills near Oroville, north of Sacramento, a750-acre fire was contained Saturday after burning four homes, sixoutbuildings and six vehicles, and forcing about 150 residents toflee briefly Friday night, according to the California Department ofForestry.
Firefighters gained the upper hand on a trio of forest fires inColorado's drought-stricken mountains Saturday, but a new blaze ofan estimated 3,000 acres in grass and timber on the eastern plainshad crews scrambling to protect a subdivision in Elbert County.
Forest spokesman Ed Christiansaid the fire was about 50 percent contained by Saturday night andthat with some cooperation from the weather, crews should be able tocomplete their containment line by Monday.
