Introduction:   One of nature's most vicious spectacles, thetornado, is poised to renew its annual assault on America, aschangeable spring weather breeds the storms that spawn twisters.
Last year was one of fewer than normal tornado deaths, but evenso, more than 700 of the violent funnel clouds struck the nation.
``There is no way of knowing what this tornado season will bring,but the way to survive is through preparedness,'' said Ed Ferguson,deputy director of the National Severe Storms Forecast Center inKansas City.
Unusually warm and wet weather last November helped trigger arecord number of tornadoes for that month, at 121 across thecountry.
The average for November is only 23 tornadoes, and therecord had been 81, set in 1973.
Last year also recorded the largest tornado outbreak in 14 years.
That took place on Mother's Day when 57 twisters tore through partsof Arkansas, Illinois, Iowa and Wisconsin.
Arkansas and Tennessee recorded the most fatalities last yearwith six deaths apiece, followed by Florida with five.
States with a single fatality apiece were Kentucky,Michigan, Missouri, New York, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas.
After a low point in the winter they begin to increase sharply inMarch and peak in May with a national average of 166 twisters inthat month, according to records kept at the National Climatic DataCenter.
June ranks second, averaging 150 tornadoes, followed by Aprilwith 109 in a typical year.
Other months averaging more than atwister-a-day somewhere in the nation are July, 82; August, 57;March, 50 and September, 38.
Hot weather stirring the air helps form thunderstorms and theirtornadoes, with 60 percent of all twisters occurring between noonand sunset, according to the National Center for AtmosphericResearch.
Tornadoes are least likely during the early morning justbefore sunrise.
But while an individual twister can cover only a small area, theyoften come in groups and in the affected area destruction can betotal.
When twisters are in an area, common sense and knowing a fewsimple rules can save lives, the National Weather Service says.
The weather service even hasits own radio network which can provide continual updates.
If atwister is reported, safety rules include:   _ At home, seek shelter immediately in a basement or interiorhallway.
_ At school, move to hallways and lie flat on the floor with headcovered.
Head for asecure shelter or lie flat on the ground.
