Introduction:   Simply put , the question was who should becounted as a person and who, if anybody, should not.
The Senate voted one answer and, in effect, invited the SupremeCourt to decide whether it was right or wrong.
That happened because in the arithmetic of congressionalreapportionment, every question becomes complex, contentious andpolitically charged.
The point at issue in Senate debate on a new immigration bill waswhether illegal aliens should be counted in the process that willreallocate House seats among states after the 1990 census.
Therecould be enough of them to shift seats away from at least fivestates to Sun Belt states with large numbers of illegal residents.
Nobody is certain because counting illegal aliens is a hard thingto do, given the fact that they don't want to be spotted by thegovernment.
Then again, the Census Bureau maintains that notincluding them, and still coming up with an accurate 1990 populationcount, would be even more difficult.
There were otherguesses, some of them far higher.
The Senate has passed an immigration billincluding an amendment that would cut illegal aliens from theredistricting numbers, but it is not likely to clear Congress beforethe next year's national head count.
Sen. Richard Shelby, D-Ala., proposed, and won, the immigrationbill amendment that is supposed to exclude illegal aliens from theredistricting process.
It does not come with instructions, so the department wouldhave to figure out how.
Shelby's amendment says only that the secretary is to ``make suchadjustments in total population figures as may be necessary, usingsuch methods and procedures as the secretary determines feasible andappropriate'' to keep illegal aliens from being counted incongressional reapportionment.
That task would be perilous politically, since it would involvetaking House seats away from some states and giving them to others,all on the basis of estimates.
Opponents of the Shelby amendment, led by Sen. Edward M.
``Theframers of the Constitution intended to count all persons,'' Kennedysaid.
But Sen. Alan K. Simpson, R-Wyo., said the people who wrote thedocuments had no concept of illegal aliens because there weren't anyin their time.
He said it is unfair tocount illegal aliens in reapportionment.
``It just does not make anysense,'' Dole said.
Women couldn't vote when theConstitution and the 14th Amendment were adopted, but they alwayswere counted.
``Somebody is going to challenge it...'' he said.
``Then, for the first time, we will let the SupremeCourt of the United States decide something that we need an answerto ...'' Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist forThe Associated Press, has reported on Washington and nationalpolitics for more than 25 years.
