Introduction:SLOVENES always had at least as much in common with their Alpine neighboursas with their Balkan partners in the former Yugoslavia.
A glance at the map shows what he means.
At its narrowest point, only a 46km- long strip of Slovenian coast- line separates Italy from the rest offormer Yugoslavia.
Austria is insulated from the war-torn regions of Croatiaand Bosnia-Herzegovina, both once ruled by the Austrian Habs- burgs, thanksto its own 324 km-long border with Slovenia.
But Slovenia would hate to be perceived merely as a convenient cordonsanitaire.
Thehighway is also thick with aid trucks and an ever-decreasing volume of'normal' cargoes moving south-east towards Croatia.
Independence has, above all, brought peace to Slovenia and left it free toimplement the kind of rational market reforms and privatisation policieswhich remain blocked in the republics absorbed and impoverished by warfurther south.
Economists, however, are quick to point out that independence has its costs.
Slovenia has always had a strong tourism industry of its own.
But it alsobenefited from the overnight stays of foreign tourists heading further southto Croatia's Dalmatian coast.
Now the once-thriving seaside hotels arefilled with discons- olate refugees and Croatia's main source of hardcurrency income has disappeared.
These helped restrain costs and improve competitiveness inmore demanding hard currency markets.
There is no nostalgia for the old Yugoslavia, which Slovenes tried withoutsuccess to trans- form into a looser confederal structure.
But a mixture ofcompassion for the suffering of their fellow southern Slavs and economicloss ensures that the Slovene authorities, while categorically ruling outany possibility of resuming old political ties with former Yugoslavia, pray,without much hope, for a quick and lasting solution to the conflict and theresumption of normal economic ties.
The war, with its violent and deliberate displacement of millions of people,has and is taking place in the ethnically mixed border lands of Croatia andBosnia relatively distant from the Slovene border.
'The president is particularly scathing against what he calls the west'sdefinition of the war in Bosnia as a civil or ethnic war. '
Of course thepeople who are dying do not care how it is defined.
But for the inter-national community it is essential to define it as a war of aggressionagainst a UN- recognised state and draw the appropriate conclusions.
It is atragedy that Bosnia's elected leader has now been reduced by theinternational com- munity to merely one of sev- eral ethnic leaders,' headds.
Preventing the war in parts of former Yugoslavia destabilising Slovenia andscaring off tourists remains a top priority for the new republic.
The border with Croatia is now in effect sealed against further immigationafter 70,000 refugees, equivalent to 3.5 per cent of the local population,were taken in.
Refugees are housed and cared for by local authorities aroundthe country, often in former Yugoslav army barracks, at an annual cost ofaround Dollars 250m.
Many are expected to stay even after the war ends.
Thishelps to give the coalition a wider parliamentary base.
The inclusion of the 'left- wing' parties, with their traditional links toworkers and the trade unions showed its value last month when they twicegave their assent to a new wages pact designed to reduce real incomes.
Independent economists calculate that average real incomes have to fallaround 10 per cent from current levels of around DM650 a month if theSlovenian economy is to compete effectively for new markets in the west andattract foreign investment.
