Introduction: It's been described as the largest current civilengineering project, a multibillion dollar link that will helprevolutionize Europe's economy and physically end Britain'shistoric isolation, a dream born in Napoleon's day.
The ``Chunnel'' between Britain and France is half-dug andscheduled to open on time in three years.
But the three-tunnelthoroughfare under the English Channel is almost 60 percent overbudget, embroiled in a contractor dispute and scrambling for moreinvestment money.
The project also has raised increasing hostility among manyBritons, who fear it will provide an easy conduit for ills from thecontinent ranging from terrorism to rabid animals.
The Chunnel's June 15, 1993 scheduled debut will come six monthsafter the 12-nation European Community formally drops remainingtrade barriers and becomes a unified marketplace of 320 millionconsumers.
While the French are forging ahead with a high-speed rail linkto their end of the tunnel, for example, state-owned British Railis dragging.
``Britain becomes branch line of Europe,'' a Guardian newspaperheadline declared after the government announced June 14 that itwould not fund a high-speed rail link between London and theBritish end of the tunnel.
Napoleon wanted to build it butBritain warned him off.
Tunneling actually was started insubsequent efforts in 1882 and 1974 but they were scrapped.
Random samplings elicit fears that it will import rabies,terrorists, invading armies.
Eurotunnel Chairman Andre Benard said the company has providedfor any foreseeable problems, but stressed: ``We always made itvery clear that this was a risk project.''
Chunnel trains will carry passengers, cars and freight betweenLondon and Paris in about three hours, roughly the same time as aflight including ground travel, and at least twice as fast as acar-ferry journey.
Eurotunnel estimates that 28 million passengers and 17 percentof Britain's non-oil trade will pass through the tunnel in thefirst year.
This past Wednesday, shareholders approved a sale of an extra$906 million worth of stock to existing shareholders, who alreadyhave bought $1.7 billion worth.
Assuming banks approve, the project would have a total of about$14.6 billion in debt and equity financing.
But the order of magnitude of increase will slow down,'' saidRichard Hannah, a transport analyst with the London investment firmUBS Phillips and Drew.
Eurotunnel says it doesn't expect to p end ofthe century, and probably won't pay shareholders a dividend until1999, four years later than envisioned.
Themore urgent worries for Eurotunnel have been costs, creditors andcontractor feuds.
In October, concern about the rising pricetag drove Eurotunnel'sbanking syndicate to freeze funds for three months until thecompany reached a truce with Trans-Manche Link, the consortium of10 British and French contractors doing the construction, overresponsibility for $1.7 billion in overruns.
The British government's refusal to finance a rail link haspresented another big obstacle.
Eurotunnel says is can survive without a new link.
But cnt that shewon't spend taxpayers' money on a rail link.
Trains capableof 190 mph will link the tunnel's freight and passengers to anotherplanned high-speed system.
On the other hand, residents of Kent, in England's rural andprosperous Southeast, have campaigned strenuously against havinghigh-speed trains screaming through their back yards.
