Introduction:Congress has been dismayingly inconsistent in its votingon gun-control legislation this year, first passing the BradyBill, then moving in the opposite direction by defeating aprovision to ban certain assault weapons and ammunition.
But there are strong grounds for arguing that the SecondAmendment is no barrier to gun-control legislation.
In myopinion, it even provides a solid constitutional basis foreffective national legislation to regulate guns and gunowners.
Virginia's version, latercopied by New York and North Carolina, brought together threeelements in one article -- affirmation of a right to beararms, reliance on state militia, and opposition to a standingarmy:"That the people have a right to keep and bear arms; thata well-regulated militia, composed of the body of the peopletrained to arms, is the proper, natural, and safe defense ofa free state; that standing armies, in times of peace, aredangerous to liberty, and therefore ought to be avoided.
But in several states ratification came only withsolemn pledges that amendments would follow.
In the version of the arms amendment he presented,Madison dropped mention of a standing army and added aconscientious objector clause.
"The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall notbe infringed, a well armed and well regulated militia beingthe best security of a free country, but no personreligiously scrupulous of bearing arms shall be compelled torender military service in person.
"In this version, "bearing arms" must mean "to rendermilitary service," or why else would there have to be anexemption for religious reasons?
This militia amendment was referred to a congressionalcommittee, and came out of committee in this form:"A well regulated militia, composed of the body of thepeople, being the best security of a free state, the right ofthe people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; butno person religiously scrupulous shall be compelled to beararms.
"The House then debated this new version in committee ofthe whole and, surprisingly, considering the subsequenthistory of the provision, never once did any member mentionthe private uses of arms, for self-protection, or hunting, orany other personal purpose.
Yes, ofcourse, it would go without saying, especially then whenthere were no organized police forces and when hunting wasessential to the food supply.
But such facts tell us almost nothing relevant to ourquestion.
Almost everyone also owned a dog for the samepurposes.
The Constitution nevertheless says nothing aboutthe undeniable right to own a dog.
There are uncountablenumbers of rights not enumerated in the Constitution.
Theserights are neither denied nor disparaged by not being raisedto the explicit constitutional level.
"Every free able-bodied white male citizen" (it was 1792,after all) was required by the act to "enroll" in the militiafor training and active service in case of need.
Whenreporting for service, every militiaman was required toprovide a prescribed rifle or musket, and ammunition.
The expectation was that every man would havehis own firearms.
What does this mean for the question of gun control today?Well, for example, it means that Congress has theconstitutional power to enact a Militia Act of 1992, torequire every person who owns a gun or aspires to own one to"enroll" in the militia.
In plain 1990s English, if you wantto own a gun, sign up with the National Guard.
Restoring a 200-year-old understanding of the Constitutionmay be difficult, but there isn't time to dawdle.
Americansnow own more than 200 million guns, and opinion polls showAmericans want gun control.
