Introduction: An annual Agriculture Department surveyconfirmed Thursday that a deadening drought will curtail the fallcorn harvest by a third or more, resulting in higher retail foodprices for months and years to come.
However, government officials said bountiful crops in recentyears has built stockpiles so high the United States need not fearactual shortages on grocery shelves and can even continue exportingfood.
The report came hours after President Reagan signed a $3.9billion relief bill that he acknowledged won't bring rain to cropsalready sweltering, but hopefully will help farmers survive toplant again next spring.
Sharp reductions also were reported for soybeans, wheat and anumber of other crops.
Overall, the department's Agricultural Statistics Board puttotal U.S. crop production at 88 percent of the 1977 average, ascale used to compare output from year to year.
That matched thelow 1983 reading, when sharp cutbacks in government acreageprograms, along with drought, reduced crop production sharply.
``Today's reports confirm that the drought has had a majorimpact on this year's crops,'' Wilson told reporters.
``But becauseof large pre-season stocks, total supplies are enough in most casesto assure and adequate food supply at home, satisfy foreigncustomers and meet our food-aid commitments.''
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate AgricultureCommittee, said in a statement, ``Today's crop report confirms ourfears about the impacts of this summer's tragic drought.
Fortunately, it appears we will have enough stocks to make itthrough this marketing year.''
The USDA's grim news came hours after President Reagan onThursday signed a $3.9 billion disaster relief bill aimed athelping drought-stricken farmers recover.
The new USDA crop estimates were based on field surveys as ofAug.
In May and June, before drought had made its biggestimpact, USDA projected the corn harvest _ based on trends and anassumption of normal weather _ at 7.3 billion bushels.
In May and June,the USDA forecast this year's output would be up slightly.
Later plantings of durum andother spring wheat varieties were brutalized by heat and dryness.
Winter wheat production was estimated at 1.55 billion bushels,down 1 percent from last year.
Durum was estimated at 54.6 million bushels, down 41 percentfrom last year's harvest, and other spring wheat was shown at 212million bushels, down 53 percent from 1987.
Cotton production was estimated at 14.9 million bales, up 1percent from last year.
Department officials said U.S. grain production this year isexpected to total 192 million metric tons, 31 percent smaller thanthe 1987 output.
The department has forecast a food price increase this year of 3percent to 5 percent.
``Sothis would bring it up to a total of 6 percent.''
He also said the United States is ``looking at an exportsituation that is not as good as it was a year ago.''
Thereremained a possibility that the United States would import somesoybeans this year, Wilson said.
He scoffed at any suggestion, however, that the United Statesmay have lost its capacity to produce sizeable crop surpluses.
Henoted that 50 million farm acres are being kept out of productionthis year in addition to millions of additional acres in thelong-term Conservation Reserve Program.
