Introduction:   Britain and France were linked beneath theEnglish Channel on Tuesday when workers used a two-inch probe toconnect two halves of a 31-mile undersea rail tunnel, officialsreported.
The linkup fulfills a dream by Napoleon in 1802, who thought hecould defeat the English by connecting Britain to Europe with aland passage.
The Chunnel is scheduled for completion in June 1993.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' said a construction unionofficial.
Eight workers suffered injuries, two seriously, about 90 minuteslater when a tractor towing supplies rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
The basic goal of the Channel Tunnel project is to enablepassengers to travel between London and Paris in about three hours.
Geological conditions account forthe different progress on each side.
``We see it as just another exercise, but I'm sure there will bea lot of parties going on,'' he said.
Preliminary tests indicated the two halves were 20 inches out ofalignment.
Another day will be needed to be certain, technicianssaid, but they called the line-up ``exceptional,'' considering themassive boring machines are drilling holes about three storieshigh.
They are expected to greet each otherwith handshakes in a few weeks.
After it is finished, one will be dismantled and hauled out inpieces.
The other will drill its own grave and be buried in cementbecause French officials said it will be too costly to extricateit.
A work slowdown since last week by militant tunnelers demandingmore pay on the French side appeared likely Monday to stall thelinkup until the weekend or beyond.
The Chunnel actually consists of three tunnels - two for railwaytrains and a smaller maintenance tunnel between them.
Taking into account all the tunnels, 80 percent of the drillinghas been completed by giant, Japanese-built boring machines workingfrom Calais and Folkstone, England.
Tuesday's linkup in the service tunnel is described by theFrench as a ``mouse ole'' - a bore only two inches in diameter.
Eurotunnel PLC, the world's largest engineering project,announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreement with its banks on$3.5 billion in new credit.
The Chunnel's scheduled debut in mid-1993 would come six monthsafter the 12-nation European Community formally drops remainingtrade barriers, becoming a unified marketplace of 320 millionconsumers.
A study released last Friday in Paris by transportation expertssaid the tunnel's completion will aggravate traffic congestion in awide area of continental Europe.
Some Britons have worries of a different sort, fearing an influxof ills from the continent ranging from terrorism to rabid animals.
Since construction began in late 1987, there have been sevendeaths on the British side and two on the French.
Five Britishfirms were ordered last Wednesday to stand trial on charges relatedto the death of a construction worker last year.
Napoleon wanted to build it, but Britain warned him off.
