A poor ventilation system that does little more thanrecycle old, stale air from one end of the building to another.
Millions ofAmerican office workers are getting more than they bargained for when theyinhale in a building that has no fresh air.
Along with oxygen, they may begetting flu and other infectious bugs from their co-workers.
That'sbecause, in today's modern office buildings, recirculated air can meanrecycled flu and other airborne infections.
"Modern office buildings are tight,"says Jon Rosenberg, public health officer in California's occupational healthprogram. "
"Experts saythe problem is not the same as "sick building syndrome" -- a situation inwhich workers are exposed chronically to toxic chemicals and gases emittedfrom carpets, furniture and other building materials.
But as in "sick building syndrome," it's the airtight environment that setsthe stage for problems.
"People who had nodirect contact with this case, might have been exposed in far reaches of thebuilding.
"If tuberculosis can spread in poorly ventilated buildings, socan other infectious bugs.
Respiratory infection experts say that flu virusesand measles are easier to spread than TB.
"This particular study deals onlywith TB," says Dr. Jonathan Samet, a respiratory-disease expert at theUniversity of New Mexico, "but the observations may apply to other organisms,such as the respiratory viruses that cause flu.
Even lower levelsof outdoor air ventilation, below 10 cfm, have become common since 1973, thepost-oil embargo era.
In the study, Nardell estimated that if outdoor airventilation in the government building had been doubled -- to about 35 cubicfeet per minute, a level that Massachusetts recommends for buildings wheresmoking is permitted -- only half as many workers would have been infectedwith tuberculosis.
Other studies have documented:;   (check) Flu spreadsquickly on airplanes where ventilation systems consist entirely ofrecirculated air.
(check) Measles are transmitted by infectious air in apediatrician's waiting room.
(check) Tuberculosis can spread in homelessshelters, prisons and hospitals where ventilation is poor.
"It may survive several hours in dry air," says VernonKnight, a respiratory virus disease expert at Baylor College of Medicine inHouston.
"In those tight buildings, they continue to recirculate it, and theyprobably build up.
Flu and colds will probably never be eliminated from theworkplace entirely, and it may not make sense to install a new ventilationsystem unless the air quality is very low.
If the ventilation is moderatelyeffective but not ideal, further improvements yield only a slight decrease ininfectious illness.
