Joseph Hazelwood, 42, surrendered to police in a Long Island suburb of New York City and hours later Judge Kenneth Rohl set bail at $500,000 -- 10 times what Alaskan authorities had sought.
Hazelwood left Alaska before local authorities could interview him, and had been pursued since Saturday on a fugitive warrant on three misdemeanor charges: operating a watercraft while intoxicated, reckless endangerment and negligent discharge of oil at sea.
These misdemeanors are of such a magnitude that has never been equaled, at least in this country," Rohl said.
"We have a man-made destruction that has not been equaled, probably, since Hiroshima."
FBI officials in Washington say they also are investigating whether Hazelwood could be charged with felony violations of the Clean Water Act, which prohibits negligent discharge of pollutants into navigable waters.
No people have been killed or even seriously injured by the spill, but oil has seriously disrupted the rich Prince William Sound fishing industry.
Also, animal-rescue teams estimate the spill has killed several thousand birds and hundreds of sea otters.
Estimates of wildlife deaths are not easy to make because oiled birds are hard to spot from the air, and many beaches are difficult to reach for in person inspections.
Rep. George Miller (D-Martinez), a senior member of the House Interior and Insular Affairs Committee added during a tour of Prince William Sound that fraud "is not too strong a word to describe Exxon's cleanup claims."
"What they are really doing is managing the failure," Miller said after meeting with Aleut Indian residents in the tiny fishing village of Chenega Bay.
Steve Cowper said the Coast Guard should be better able to handle coordination and management of the cleanup than Exxon, which he said was too bureaucratic. "
You need a military system to get things done," the governor said.
Although Cowper said he did not want to be "extremely critical" of Exxon, a letter sent to the Coast Guard by a state environmental official said Exxon had been unresponsive. "
President Bush earlier had sent a team of high-level officials to Valdez and determined that federal management of the cleanup was not necessary.
Rear Adm. Edward Nelson Jr., commander of the Coast Guard's 17th District in Juneau had no immediate reply to Cowper's request.
We think the most effective and efficient way to carry out this project is (for Exxon) to continue," Beathard said.
Even so, Exxon officials warned in advance that refloating the ship could uncover additional oil that had been pinned in pockets between the ship's hull and rocky Bligh Reef.
However, flow through the Alaskan pipeline returned to its normal daily flow of 2.1 million barrels Wednesday, the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. said.
Oil flow from the North Slope had been cut by 60% because the spill restricted tanker traffic in Valdez harbor, but traffic has increased.
Exxon officials were reluctant to estimate how long temporary repairs would take or discuss where the tanker would be taken to permanently patch its hull and rebuild its internal pumping system, which also was compromised in the accident.
Portland, Ore., was the company's first choice, but it backed away from that option after Oregon Gov.
Neil E. Goldschmidt and managers of the Port of Portland expressed concern that the Exxon Valdez would still be leaking oil when it arrived there.
Cowper for fouling Prince William Sound, Exxon said it would consider having the tanker repaired in the Far East -- Japan, Korea or Singapore.
Even as it made that concession, the company denied its ship would endanger any port it visited for repair.
Staff writer Larry B. Stammer in Valdez contributed to this report.
