Introduction: What kind of justice would Clarence Thomas, PresidentBush's nominee to fill the Supreme Court seat vacated byThurgood Marshall, be?
In a series of interviews with me afew weeks prior to his nomination, Mr. Thomas echoed themesthat run through his articles and speeches over the pastdecade.-- "I don't believe in quotas.
The civilrights movement was at its greatest when it proclaimed thehighest principles on which this country was founded --principles such as the Declaration of Independence which werebetrayed in the case of blacks and other minorities."
-- "I believe that society is now in a position tovigorously enforce equal rights for all Americans.
ButI believe in compensation for actual victims, not for peoplewhose only claim to victimization is that they are members ofa historically oppressed group."
-- "America should not fall into the trap of blaming allthe problems faced by blacks or other minorities on others.
We are not beggars or objects of charity.
"Basically the job of a judge is to figure out what thelaw says, not what he wants it to say," Mr. Thomas told me.
{Judge Robert} Bork was right about that,no question.
Sometimes a man's life depends on the outcome.
In a powerful speech Mr. Thomas gave on Martin Luther KingDay three years ago, he defended certain forms of civildisobedience.
Part of King's legacy, for Mr. Thomas,is his reflection on the close connection between law andmorality.
President Bush's nominee understands the hostility he islikely to face in Congress.
"When you're up before thoseconfirmation hearings, it's like going through Dante'sInferno.
When reminded of ThurgoodMarshall's comment that he could not wholeheartedly celebratethe bicentennial of the American founding because theConstitution permitted slavery, Mr. Thomas shook his head. "
Abraham Lincoln oncesaid that the American founders declared the right ofequality whose enforcement would follow as soon ascircumstances permitted.
The family shared a single outhouse with several neighbors.
In the summer of 1955, Clarence Thomas and his brotherwent to live with their maternal grandparents, who owned anice delivery and fuel oil business.
It is here, under thestern tutelage of his grandfather, Myers Anderson, that Mr. Thomas locates the beginning of his true education. "
Mygrandfather has been the greatest single influence on mylife," he claims.
He finished his undergraduate studies atHoly Cross College in Worcester, Mass.
"That's where Istarted to get political and radical," Mr. Thomas recalls.
"Iread Malcolm X. I became interested in the Black Panthers.
"In 1971 he founded the Black Student Union at Holy Cross.
Hewent on to Yale Law School, where he worked summers at NewHaven Legal Assistance, continuing what he calls "mypolitical consciousness raising.
"Nevertheless, "I never gave up my grandfather's ideals,and when my left-wing opinions began to clash with thoseideals, I began to move away from the left."
Eventually hetook a job with Missouri Attorney General (now Senator) JohnDanforth because "he promised to treat me like anyone else.
He promised to ignore the hell out of me.
"At a conference of black conservatives in San Francisco,Calif., Mr. Thomas's eloquent departures from the civilrights orthodoxy on quotas and government handouts greatlyimpressed the newly installed Reagan administration, and in1981 he was nominated to be assistant secretary for civilrights in the Department of Education.
The full Senateseated him with only two senators opposed.
Circuit with Mr. Thomas and is his closest friend on the bench) thinks, isthat "Clarence has an amazing ability to neutralizeopposition.
Just as in his life, he turns negative valuesinto positive values, an amazing feat.
"Can Clarence Thomas be confirmed to the Supreme Court?Even liberal judges will go on record praising Mr.
"If I or a member of my family were in trouble, he is thekind of person I'd like to appear before," Judge Damon Keith,a Carter appointee on the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals inDetroit said in an interview.
"Our judicial philosophy maynot be the same, but he is a bright and reflective man whobelieves passionately in fairness.
I say this withoutreservation, and in full knowledge of all the people whocomplain about him.
"Dean Robinson added, "People often confuse what Clarencethinks with what some of his friends on the right think, butClarence is his own man."
While at the EEOC, Mr. Thomas gavespeeches accusing the Republican Party of "blatantindifference" toward black voters, and chastised RonaldReagan in particular for letting Bob Jones University getaway with racial discrimination, and for "foot dragging" onthe Voting Rights Act extension.
Someweeks before word of the nomination came, Mr. Thomasconfessed to being slightly bemused by all the attentionbeing paid to him by scholars and courtwatchers.
"The problemfor my opponents, and for my friends, is that I don't think Ifit any of these molds very well.
Once people figure thisout, maybe they'll leave me alone.
