Introduction: The Maoist Shining Path guerrillas whodominate Peru's Upper Huallaga River Valley have brought their ownlaw and order to a cocaine-corrupted, violence-ridden region.
In a rare conversation with reporters, a Shining Path politicalofficer, who spoke only on condition he not be identified, gave anexample of the kind of law the guerrillas have laid down: ``Do notsteal so much as a needle or thread and return what you borrow.''
In a nation where economic chaos reigns and few laws arerespected, the Shining Path is setting down clear rules and makingthem stick.
Paul Feeley, aCanadian Roman Catholic priest working in Aucayacu, 255 milesnortheast of Lima.
In late July four young homosexual men who rendezvoused at abridge a few miles outside Tingo Maria, 35 miles south of here, wereset upon and killed by the rebels.
A few months earlier the rebels executed eight youths near TingoMaria for smoking cigarettes laced with semi-refined cocaine.
``People have had to discipline themselves,'' said Raul Aranda,an agronomist in Tingo Maria, explaining the effects of``revolutionary justice.''
``In rural areas a man must be faithfulto his wife and is permitted to go drinking only once a week.
Peru's elected officials have painted the Shining Path insurgentsas lunatic killers.
Their only condition is that the semi-refined coca paste be sent outof Peru.
The rebels charge coca farmers a ``tax'' of 10 to 15 percent onthe earnings from the sale of their crops to drug traffickers, whoprocess the leaf into paste and sell it to Colombian cocainedealers.
People in the Upper Huallaga appear to accept Shining Path'ssocial order.
``Why do you think people have joined the Shining Path?
``When thegovernment began trying to wipe out coca, police came and mistreatedpeople.
Even top government officials in Lima saythere is much truth to the complaints.
``A cop in the Huallaga Valley expects to be bribed,'' said asenior Interior Ministry official, speaking on condition ofanonymity.
He gets off theplane from Lima with his hand out for a payoff.''
Official corruption is a problem throughout Peru, but in theHuallaga Valley it seems rampant.
A half dozen peasants complained in separate interviews that toobtain a farm loan from the local Banco Agrario they have to kickback 25 percent of the loan to bank officials.
``What I've heard is that if you want to be named a teacher inthe valley,'' said Feeley, ``it's three months salary as payment.
``If the Shining Path has the image of an organization that'sfighting corruption in a very corrupt place, that's going to winthem some points,'' Feeley said.
A lawyer in Tingo Maria said his caseload had dropped offdramatically because peasants no longer come into town to seekjustice.
``Formal justice here is ineffective, corrupt and timeconsuming,'' he said.
``The Shining Path's justice is quick, freeand very effective.
