Introduction:Backed by public antipathy toward the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster, Gov.
Steve Cowper on Thursday threatened to close down the trans-Alaska oil pipeline unless its owners meet his terms for improved safety and cleanup measures.
An aide to the governor described the companies' response as "generally OK" but said that Cowper may issue an order putting his plan into effect anyway.
In one proposed draft of an order, continuation of routine operations at the Alyeska Marine Terminal near the town of Valdez is described as creating "a substantial potential risk of additional oil spill" because the consortium has failed to demonstrate it can manage a large spill with minimal environmental effects.
-- The names of 12 oil spill-response team members who do nothing but respond to oil spills and who are available for such duty 24 hours a day.
-- A limit of one tanker being loaded at a time until all designated cleanup equipment is in place, and the end of all loading within 72 hours if cleanup equipment is not ready.
-- Demonstration by April 30 of adequate gear and supplies to handle another 10-million-gallon spill.
"We want the oil industry to be ready for a spill of this magnitude if it happens tomorrow," Cowper said.
If it isn't complied with, we don't have any remedy available to us except shut down the terminal.
It also would badly pinch the state treasury, which relies on oil taxes and royalties for 85% of its income.
Cowper said he would seek special legislation to tap Alaska's $10-billion Permanent Fund, a kind of super budget reserve, should any terminal shutdown last long enough to cause short-term funding woes for the state.
Even if Cowper's shutdown were found to illegally interfere with interstate commerce and be overturned in court, it could last long enough to drive home a point about improving cleanup response plans.
Alyeska also suggested expanding the Coast Guard's radar system, which had been scaled down as a cost-saving measure in the early 1980s, and offered to keep on hand additional equipment to contain, skim and disperse spills.
My understanding is that he turned that computer off and it was not as if it hit the rocks on automatic pilot," Exxon Chairman Lawrence G. Rawl said in testimony before the Senate Commerce Committee.
Tom Kilpatrick of the California Maritime Academy, a former captain himself, said autopilots take full control of a ship once they are switched on.
"The helm will not respond if it's in autopilot," he said.
The nation's worst oil spill penetrated a national park Thursday, with an airborne spotter "seeing an oil sheen up on some of the rocks and seeing staining on the rocks" at Kenai Fjords National Park, park spokesman John Quinley said.
However, favorable winds were still keeping most of the crude offshore, he said.
Also on Thursday, the former captain of the Exxon Valdez, Joseph Hazelwood, left jail in New York after a judge slashed his bail from $500,000 to $25,000.
Justice Thomas Starke said the earlier bail amount was "unconstitutionally excessive."
Hazelwood, who lives with his wife and daughter in the Long Island community of Huntington, was ordered to return to court May 5 for extradition proceedings to Alaska, where he is wanted on three misdemeanor charges in the spill.
