Introduction: Here is a chronology of the Exxon Valdez oil spill, its cleanupand related developments:   March 24: The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez runs aground on BlighReef some 25 miles south of Valdez, Alaska, spilling nearly 11million gallons of North Slope crude oil into Prince William Sound.
March 26 : Alaska fishermen's union spokeswoman Riki Ott says thegroup wants full compensation for damage from the spill.
More than250 lawsuits will be filed against Exxon in the following months.
March 30: Exxon fires tanker captain Joseph Hazelwood aftertests reveal he was legally drunk 10 hours after the accident.
Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan calls the spillthe oil industry's ``Three Mile Island.''
June 19: Exxon and other big oil companies announce plans for avoluntary network of response teams capable of handling big spillsanywhere in U.S. coastal waters.
Sept. 15: Exxon suspends its beach cleanup for the winter,claiming it has left 1,100 miles of oiled beaches ``environmentallystable'' and saying its 25-week cleanup involving more than 10,000workers was a job well done.
Alaska officials disagree and announcetheir own $21 million winter cleanup plan.
Oct. 10: State officials warn people not to consume shellfish inareas affected by oil.
Oct. 27: The National Wildlife Federation says Exxon hasresigned from its corporate advisory board.
Nov. 8: The U.S. House of Representatives passes a billpreserving states' ability to adopt stricter oil spill liabilitylaws than the federal government.
Dec. 4: U.S. Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner saysExxon's cleanup has cost the company $1.9 billion, and praisesExxon for ``a very substantial, good-faith effort.''
Dec. 31: Wildlife officials report that more than 1,000 seaotters, 140 bald eagles and nearly 36,500 seabirds have been founddead in the spill area.
Jan. 22: Hazelwood goes on trial in Anchorage, facing charges ofcriminal mischief, reckless endangerment, negligent discharge ofoil, and operating a vessel while intoxicated.
Feb. 27: A federal grand jury indicts Exxon and its shippingsubsidiary on five criminal counts.
Officials say that if convictedon all counts, the company could be fined up to $1.6 million andcould be assessed an additional $700 million in penalties.
