Introduction:Bank of Boston Corp.'s decision to treat its Third World loans much more conservatively is expected to have significant domestic and international repercussions, bankers and analysts say.
Domestically, the move reflects the competitive advantage that regional banks with large loan-loss reserves have over their big brothers in such money centers as New York, Chicago and San Francisco.
On one hand, there is a small group of money-center banks with comparatively thin reserves against large loans to developing countries.
On the other hand is a group of regional institutions which, with relatively small exposure to developing countries, are willing to establish big reserves against such loans or, as Bank of Boston decided Monday, to completely write off some loans as uncollectible.
The Bank of Boston decision "may well drive a wedge between the money-center banks and the regional banks," adds James J. McDermott, Jr., director of research at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc., a securities firm which specializes in bank stocks.
"It's created an enormous quandary for many money-center banks," Mr. McDermott says.
Management could use their reserve position to emphasize stength when competing for deposits and banking business against larger banks.
The reserve action also could make it easier for institutions like Bank of Boston to attract investors to their stock and other securities, bank analysts said.
Earlier this year, Bank of Boston proved one of the more difficult regionals to corral into a $6 billion bank loan for Mexico, according to New York bankers.
Moreover, most of the nation's big banks couldn't afford to follow Bank of Boston's lead without crippling their capital, and reducing their common equity-asset ratios to unacceptably low levels.
For instance, if Manufacturers Hanover Corp. imitated Bank of Boston's action, it would have to add $3.13 billion to reserves and would have a common assets ratio of only 0.69%, Keefe Bruyette estimates.
Manufacturers Hanover declined to comment on whether it might follow Bank of Boston's action.
Other large New York banks also declined to disclose their plans, although a spokeman for Chase Manhattan Corp., said, "We're obviously looking at it."
Mellon Bank Corp. said yesterday that it expects a fourth-quarter loss of about $220 million, and that it would increase loan-loss reserves by about $180 million to cover troubled foreign loans.
The stocks of several major money-center banks fell sharply yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Bank of Boston closed up 50 cents at $20.75, while Mellon fell $1 to $26.25.
Analysts expect that other regional banks may copy the action taken by Bank of Boston.
"I wouldn't be surprised if some of the medium-sized regionals decided to follow," said Cheryl Swaim, an analyst and vice president at Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
In Boston, there were rumors Bank of New England might announce a similar move, but a company spokesman said "reserve levels are appropriate."
Along with $330 million in such loans previously put on non-accrual, Bank of Boston has now either charged off, or put on non-accrual, all of its $1 billion loans to heavily indebted developing countries.
While Bank of Boston's action is the most striking to date to remove Latin exposure from its balance sheet, smaller similar actions began at other banks around mid-year.
