Introduction: Carl Lewis said he knew Ben Johnson was taking performance-enhancing drugs just after their 100-meter final last fall at the Seoul Olympics. "
He got out of those blocks like a caged lion," Lewis said in an interview Sunday at the Los Angeles Marathon, where he was representing a sponsor.
"How can anybody in the world do that after running all those rounds (preliminary heats)?
" Now Lewis has been implicated in an alleged sabotage of Johnson's drug test, which returned a positive result for the banned anabolic steroid stanozolol.
According to Francis' testimony, Johnson said that an unidentified man who had been talking with Lewis sat near the beer that was provided for the athletes to facilitate them in providing urine samples.
Francis said that two witnesses told him that the stranger had spoken with Lewis in another area of the waiting room.
Lewis had finished second to Johnson, who set a world record of 9.79 seconds in winning the 100-meter gold medal, and subsequently also had to be tested. "
Any allocation or innuendo that Carl Lewis tampered with Ben Johnson's drink or sample is ludicrous," said David Greifinger, Lewis' attorney.
Charlie and Ben should own up to the fact that what they did was wrong, and should promise to never to do it again and move on with their lives.
By continuing their present course of action they are just embarrassing themselves further."
Lewis could not be reached for comment Monday.
Though Johnson's gold medal and Seoul world-record time were both revoked, his world mark of 9.83 seconds stands.
Lewis said Sunday that officials of the International Amateur Athletics Federation should disallow Johnson's world record from Rome because Francis has testified his sprinter took drugs before the World Championships.
If that were to happen, Lewis would replace Johnson as the world record-holder.
Lewis also contended that Francis' testimony painted a false picture as to why Johnson would take performance-enhancing drugs.
According to testimony, since 1981 Johnson has taken such drugs as furazabol, stanozolol and the human growth hormone, which is taken from the pituitary glands of human cadavers or can be taken in synthetic form.
Lewis said track and field is not infested with steroid users as some are beginning to believe in light of the Canadian inquiry.
Most of your great athletes are clean," Lewis said.
"There are athletes who do have a problem.
Lewis, however, refused to implicate any of his colleagues.
But Lewis defended Evelyn Ashford, a world-class sprinter who was implicated as a steroid user in Francis' testimony last week.
Lewis and Ashford are teammates on the Santa Monica Track Club. "
No way in the world does she take drugs," Lewis said, pounding a table.
I don't think that will hurt her image because Evelyn is clean and she always stood for being clean.
In finishing second at the Olympics, Lewis set a U.S. record of 9.92 seconds.
It didn't ease the pain of not winning and feeling he (Johnson) was on drugs.
But it made me feel like I'm putting something back into track and field because I'm setting an example."
Lewis called for Johnson to also become a role model.
"I think Ben is 110% irresponsible in not coming out and telling kids to stay off drugs," he said.
"He needs to stand up and say, 'Don't do it.
Look what happened to me whether I knew it or not, make sure you know.
The biggest thing about drug use is denial.
Somebody takes cocaine because they want to get high.
Some people take steroids because they want to run faster.
Lewis, who won four gold medals at the 1984 Summer Games and has been one of the great sprinters and long jumpers in track and field, said he is determined to help the sport's image.
If anybody gets what they deserve in track and field, it's me.
Lewis said their philosophy was inspired by the late Dr. Martin Luther King, who once said it is important to make such sacrifices. "
That people cannot sacrifice for something in their life, whether it is a small insignificant thing to others or a big thing to the world, what's the use of living?"
