Officer Mark Dickey, speaking publicly for the first time since the Jan. 14 incident, told a state Senate oversight committee in sworn testimony that he had so little faith in his own report that he would not want it used against him if he were suspected of a crime.
Dickey, who was testifying under subpoena, admitted under questioning that the black man, Don Jackson, never used profanity during the arrest as Dickey had indicated in his report.
Dickey also admitted that he intended to inflict pain on Jackson when he put handcuffs on him as a way to control him.
Police Misconduct Allegations Sen. Daniel Boatwright (D-Concord), chairman of the Senate Select Committee on State Procurement and Expenditure Practices, called the hearing into the incident to review allegations of police misconduct in Long Beach.
The incident received nationwide attention after a camera hidden in Jackson's car videotaped the arrest, during which Dickey swore at Jackson after stopping his car for an alleged traffic violation and then appeared to push his head through a plate-glass window.
Jackson, a Hawthorne police sergeant on disability leave and a self-styled crusader against police brutality, had gone to Long Beach that night with an NBC television crew following in a separate vehicle in what he termed a "sting" operation to validate reports of racism and brutality by Long Beach police officers.
At one point, Boatwright asked Dickey: "You became the judge, jury and executioner as to whether he was challenged to a fight?"
This little kangaroo court gives these politicians a chance to run for office.
Any resemblance between this and a fair hearing is just imaginary," Hannon told reporters afterward.
"They are taking stuff out of context and just badgering him with it."
Jackson, also testifying under subpoena, said that he and Jeff Hill, an off-duty federal corrections officer who drove the car, took great care not to break traffic laws when they cruised along Pacific Coast Highway in Long Beach.
He alleged that in addition to pushing his face into the glass, Dickey hurt him by bending his fingers while handcuffing him and pushed his face into the hood of the police car.
But Dickey conceded at the hearing that it was he, not Jackson, who uttered obscenities.
He testified that he thought Jackson, who immediately stepped out of the car after it came to a halt, might be trying to provide a diversion for an armed partner in the car.
He said his actions were an attempt to "accomplish my No.
1 job that night: to go home in one piece."
At one point in the proceeding, Boatwright had Dickey and Jackson weighed in an attempt to show that Jackson is shorter and weighs less than the officer.
Boatwright contended that in using that type of hold the officer would have had to push Jackson into the window deliberately.
Dickey, who cut his hand, noted that Jackson suffered no facial injuries when the glass shattered.
Jackson, in his testimony, defended his self-appointed role as a police anti-brutality activist, saying "my duty is to uphold the law and I am doing that in the highest tradition."
He said he is troubled, though, that Long Beach police are investigating his background on the Hawthorne Police Department rather than concentrating on the incident.
Boatwright adjourned the hearing, which was held at the Hall of Administration in downtown Los Angeles, after about six hours of testimony.
He said it would reconvene later to hear from the additional witnesses.
