Hispanics are three times as likely to develop diabetesas the general population, and 40 percent of the 700,000 victims inTexas are Mexican-American.
More than 150,000 Americans die from diabetes each year; another150,000 deaths are diabetes-related, according to the AmericanDiabetes Association.
No one really knows what sparks it, but researchers believeHispanics could hold the key.
San Antonio, the nation's ninthlargest city, with a population that is 50 percent Hispanic, isbecoming the base for diabetes studies.
Epidemiologist Dr. Michael Stern has devoted 10 years to studyingHispanic diabetes and led the grassroots study of the most commonform, which develops mostly in obese adults over 40 who may have afamily history of the disease.
Stern said family studies of diabetic patients are brining himcloser to finding the gene that triggers the disease, and to ascreening test.
Educating elementary-school-age children about healthy dietswould help reduce the number of diabetes cases, DeFronzo said.
Aly El-Shiekh envisions astronauts on athree-year trip to Mars ``knitting'' themselves a space stationusing ceramic fibers that can be braided into panels, beams, boxesand practically any other shape.
El-Shiekh and his students are developing machinery to braid longstrands of ceramic fibers.
Such fibers, bonded with epoxy, also willform heat shields and many of the parts in the vessel that carriespeople to Mars.
While much of his work relates to the Mars Mission ResearchCenter here, El-Shiekh sees a big future for composite materialslike ceramic fibers.
``The day may very well come when you are driving around with carengine parts of ceramic fiber,'' he said, adding that thevibration-damping properties of the materials also would make themgood for torsion bars in cars.
``We also are working on the idea of putting this braided fabricin concrete as reinforcing material instead of metal rods,'' hesaid.
The fibers, including Kevlar now used to make bulletproof vests,also could be used to make some body parts, and El-Shiekh is workingwith Duke University researchers on ceramic ``stents,'' collapsiblebraces for arteries.
said El-Shiekh, who canproduce shapes ranging from hollow cubes to panels that haveopenings for wiring and conduits already braided into them.
``Thebig problem is cost and that's why we're working on this automatedmachinery.''
It's 8 p.m. and a dozen people wait in the lobby ofBoston City Hospital's emergency room.
Peter Moyer is called to a car accident victim who has onlyslight injuries but slips so deeply into unconsciousness he canbarely be roused by two physicians.
``There is an emergency in the emergency room right now in notonly New York and Boston but around the country and for a variety ofreasons,'' said Ken Raske, president of the Greater New YorkHospital Association.
Drugs, and their side effects of AIDS, violence and psychiatricdisorders, play a role in the problems plaguing big-city emergencyrooms, Raske said.
Efforts to stem the rising tide of drug abuse comes at a timewhen emergency rooms already face increased patient loads, partlybecause of the reduced role of the traditional family doctor andpartly because there are more people who can't afford a privatedoctor.
``It's really providing a major backlog in the emergencydepartment system,'' said Diane Howard, director of the AmericanHospital Association's division of ambulatory care and healthpromotion.
