Introduction:CSO It is already a multi-million pound disaster for British agriculture and now it threatens to erupt into a major political row between European governments.
It is bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) -- "mad cow" disease -- and few would be prepared to say exactly when and where it will end.
Next week European Community health ministers will meet to discuss a German call for a ban on British beef imports to that country.
Some German politicians say their country should risk breaking Single Market free trade rules because the potential health risks are so grave.
Meanwhile, the controversy in Britain is reaching new heights.
Next day, one of the farming industry's loudest voices, the magazine Farmers Weekly hit back at what it called "a diet of speculation, half-truths and downright lies" and denounced what it called "certain publicity-hungry scientists promoted by the media more interested in fiction than fact. "
"Mad Cow" disease was probably first observed on a farm in Kent in 1985, when four animals were put down after they were observed drooling, staggering before collapsing.
Acting on this advice, in July 1988, John MacGregor, then Agriculture Minister, introduced a ban on such ruminant protein being used in feed.
Cattle confirmed as having BSE have been put down and incinerated, with the ashes being buried.
In 1989 a further ban was introduced, on cattle offal sold for human consumption.
That year it was officially predicted that 20,000 animals would be affected before the feed ban, together with the drying up of any supplies already on farms, had its effect.
But the spread of BSE has confounded original expectations.
Some 8,004 cattle have died from BSE despite being born after the feed ban was introduced.
That theory has been assailed by critics of the ministry.
Ministry scientists, originally dismissive, are now reassessing his theories.
More recently, researchers have suggested that in some cattle, BSE has been "vertically" transmitted from cow to calf.
This month 19 cattle have died on farms where MAFF is conducting a seven-year experiment into the disease.
It is a daunting possibility for the farming industry, which has responded angrily.
"There is no evidence that this disturbing disease can be transferred from cow to calf," Farmers Weekly insisted last week.
More cautiously, MAFF told The Sunday Telegraph: "We have never said we have ruled out the possibility of maternal transmission, but even if it occurs, our scientists do not believe it will do anything other than lengthen the time before the disease is eradicated."
So how long will it be before the epidemic is ended?
Richard North, a former environmental health officer turned consultant, and a contributor to The Sunday Telegraph, believes that MAFF's statistics are being skewed to produce more optimistic figures -- claims not surprisingly rejected by the ministry.
If the disease has jumped from sheep to cattle -- and cases have also been reported in kudu antelope at London Zoo -- could it affect humans?
