As bankers and finance ministers gathered in Washington this weekend for thespring meetings of the bank and International Monetary Fund, there was noshortage of advice.
The bank is also under pressure to follow the example of Mr JacquesAttali's European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and attachstrict political conditions to its loans.
Development economists, meanwhile,are urging the bank to respect the rhetoric of last year's World DevelopmentReport and focus more on poverty alleviation.
Few in Washington now doubt that the bankis needed: new imperatives, such as reconstruction in eastern Europe and theMiddle East, have merely been superimposed on older, unsolved problems:Grinding poverty is a near universal condition in much of the world: 1bnpeople live on less than Dollars 1 a day.
More than 110m Third World children lack access even to primary education.
It is not an impressive bureaucracy,' saysMr John Williamson, a senior fellow at the Institute for InternationalEconomics. '
The morale of staff is lousy,' says Mr Charles Flickner, asenior analyst on the Senate Budget Committee and close observer of thebank.
Mr Conable, a former Republican congressman, arrived at the bank in1986 knowing little about either banking or development.
Although nowwell-liked (partly for championing causes such as women's rights in theThird World), many observers say he never fully recovered from a rocky startinvolving a divisive internal reorganisation of the bank.
For a decade the bankhas effectively been run by two senior - and strong-willed -vice-presidents: Mr Ernest Stern (who nearly left last year to join theEBRD) and Mr Moeen Qureshi.
Mr Preston's first challenge, says Mr Mistry, will be to wrest control ofthe bank from Messrs Stern and Qureshi; his second, to prune legions of'useless advisers' and install managers with real-world experience.
Histhird, one might add, will be quickly to establish his independence from theUS Treasury which always browbeats a newcomer.
What kind of development legacy will Mr Preston inherit?
Many optimists see the debt reduction strategy launched by MrNicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary, in 1989, as a 'final solution' tothe debt crisis.
'The Brady plan is enough,' says Mr Williamson, if developing countries arewilling to embrace reform and if it is matched by greater forgiveness ofofficial debt.
In the long run it willbe impossible to isolate Poland,' he says.
For most of the1980s, the First World doggedly refused to consider debt forgiveness.
Theresult of delay and compound interest is a total debt burden today of someDollars 1,341bn compared with a relatively manageable Dollars 639bn in 1980.
'The bank failed to take a timely leadership position on the debt crisis,'concludes Mr Richard Feinberg, director of the Overseas Development Councilin Washington.
)As incoming president, Mr Preston must review the bank's strategies forpromoting development.
Making financeconditional on structural reforms was supposed to transform the economicperformance of developing countries.
But studies indicate the results have been fairly unimpressive.
This is bothbecause countries failed to abide by the loan conditions and because thebank's policies were sometimes misguided.
Professor John Toye, director ofthe Institute for Development Studies at Sussex University, recentlycompleted an exhaustive analysis of bank programmes.
He concludes (as dointernal bank analyses) that policy-based lending has 'achieved something,particularly in relation to the external account, but not nearly as much asthe bank and donor community hoped'.
(Investment to GNP ratios havefallen markedly in Africa, the Middle East and Latin America.)
One problem is that it has lostleverage over many Third World governments.
Some analysts, including US Treasury officials, believe lacklustreperformance in much of the Third World reflects the inefficiency (andsometimes corruption) of governments.
It also says 60 per cent of EBRDresources must be devoted to the commercial sector - private businesses andstate concerns in the process of privatisation.
The World Bank operatesunder very different rules: its charter requires it to be non-political andonly its small affiliate, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), canmake direct loans to private businesses.
The EBRD isministering to a region that has historical ties with western Europe andthat has declared its commitment to democracy and free markets.
Such valuesare alien in many developing countries, but that does not imply they shouldbe denied the means for economic development.
If strict politicalconditionality had been imposed in the past, the bank could not have lent toa development star such as South Korea.
Most analysts, however, say the bank should tighten up a little.
Bank officials say greaterattention will be paid to issues such as the rule of law and transparency ofdecision-taking.
Mr Conable, to his credit, is resisting the US Treasury's pressure.
He says the bank's main aim is to combat poverty and that it will seek a'balanced relationship between government and the market' in developingcountries.
In reality, much of the most badly-needed investment is inspheres such as infrastructure, health care and education where governmentsplay a dominant role even in industrialised countries.
What we are tryingto do is facilitate the flow of private-sector funds into soundinvestments.'
Advocates of a switch to direct support of the private sectorare surely not arguing for public subsidies for Third World entrepreneurs;but if subsidies are ruled out, why should the bank's judgment of marketrisk be more reliable than that of private lenders in the west?There are alternative recipes for fostering faster Third World development.
Itwanted to impose on developing countries policies that had become recentlyfashionable in the industrialised world.
'Liberalisation matters,' says Mr Williamson at the Institute forInternational Economics, 'but education is more important.'
Ideas arecertainly important, but they do not build hospitals or schools.
More moneycould be made available: a mere 10 per cent cut in western defence spending,for example, would pay for a doubling of official aid.
Rather than tamelyaccepting the status quo, Mr Preston could use his platform to promote amore constructive attitude in rich countries.
Domestic investment as % of GNP                                  1975-82         1983-90All developing countries            26.7            23.6Africa                              26.4            19.4Middle East 26.3            23.4Latin America &amp; Caribbean           23.3            18.3Asia                                27.9            28.9 -----------------------------------------------------------------------Source:
