Introduction: THE MAN President Bill Clinton has chosen to head the task force to help gethis free trade pact with Canada and Mexico ratified may lack experience ininternational trade arenas.
Mr Daley accepted the Nafta position after being passed over for a cabinetposition and turning down an offer to be Mr Clinton's chief negotiator atthe General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva.
He chaired Mr Clinton's election campaign in Illinois, where he delivered 48per cent of the vote to Clinton, above the national average, and continuesas a tangible supporter.
Most recently, he arranged a posh Chicago dinnerfor the president that raised Dollars 1m (Pounds 670,000).However, Mr Daley's appointment to chair the White House's task force on theNorth America Free Trade Agreement is not a cosy political payoff.
Mr Clinton himself reserved his support for the deal, negotiated underGeorge Bush's administration, until side agreements dealing withenvironmental and labour issues were reached last month.
Many Democrats inCongress, including some in the powerful Illinois delegation, areuncommitted.
Mr Daley was chosen for the job, Chicago observers say, because he hasproven he can sway votes and is willing to take the risk of losing acontroversial battle. '
Clinton needssomeone with political sense to move this thing through Congress, and Daleyhas the connections,' says a fellow Washington lobbyist.
Opposition to Nafta comes from core Democratic constituencies, making it apotential political pothole for Mr Clinton.
However, Mr Rostenkowski is under investigation for improper useof his post office perks and faces an uneasy future.
His Chicago-style back-room muscle will be an invisible counterweight to thepublic tactics of Nafta's most prominent opponent, Mr Ross Perot.
'It is a very interesting juxtaposition of styles,' says Chicago politicalcommentator Mr Bruce DuMont. '
'Mr Daley has taken four months out from his Chicago law firm to lead theNafta push.
Although it passed into privateownership in 1966, its board is still dominated by high-profile unionofficials.
However, Mr Daley, by pushing Nafta, runs the risk of alienating his unionsupporters.
Mr Jim Jontz, former congressman from Indiana and director ofthe anti-Nafta Citizen's Trade Campaign, said: 'I don't know why Bill Daleywould want to be in a position like that.
