``This is just a normal day,'' said Waverly Person, chief of theU.S.
Geological Survey's National Earthquake Information Center.``We're not backing the prediction at all.''
Along the New Madrid Fault, some schools were canceled andresidents purchased earthquake emergency kits and others left town,just in case climatologist Iben Browning was right.
Browning said there was a 50-50 chance for a major earthquakeearly this week along the fault, which stretches from Marked Tree,Ark., northeast through New Marid, Mo., to Cairo, Ill.
He believestidal forces can trigger earthquakes, a theory most scientistsreject.
``There's just no way to predict an earthquake precisely,'' saidPerson, who has been with the U.S. Geological Survey for more than25 years.
The center received more than 50 calls about the New Madridforecast Monday morning and hundreds last week, said Person, whobegan doing interviews for radio and television stations just aftermidnight.
As Person talked, 24 seismographs etched out activity recordedby monitoring equipment in different parts of the United States,ranging from Alaska to Tennessee.
Quick calculations showed the quake wasmagnitude 3.5, centered about 30 miles southwest of Ely, Nev.
Between midnight and evening, four moderate quakes were recordedat Golden.
About 800 quakes between magnitudes 5.0 and 5.9 are recorded eachyear, said USGS spokesman Don Finley in Washington.
A quake of magnitude 2 is about the smallest felt byhumans.
In 1989, the earthquake center recorded 14,604 earthquakes, witha magnitude 1 or higher, Person said.
This fall, there have been two in the New Madrid Fault area,magnitude 4.6 on Sept. 26 and magnitude 3.5 on Nov. 9, which ``isnot unusual,'' he said.
Although earthquakes can be tracked historically, forecastingthem is difficult, if not impossible, Person said.
Some people watch precursor activity, but that doesn't alwayslead to an earthquake.
One woman called daily, alerting Person that an earthquake wasabout to occur, based on the number of birds that crossed herwindshield as she drove down the street.
