Introduction: Mother Nature conspired against this struggling marathon Sunday, serving up balmy, windy weather and wilting both the men's and women's fields.
Among the men, Paul Davies-Hale of England proved the most patient, winning in a rather pedestrian 2 hours 11 minutes 25 seconds, in his first marathon ever.
It was the slowest winning time in this race since 1982.
Among the women, Lisa Weidenbach of Issaquah, Wash., repeated as champion, with a personal best of 2:28:15, impressive under the circumstances.
By comparison, last year's race was 30 degrees cooler at the start.
Most distance runners prefer temperatures in the 40s, with cloud cover.
The race conditions were simply more bad luck for the 12th running of Chicago's marathon, which has been fighting for respectability since losing its sponsor in 1986 and staging no race in 1987.
After a week of summer-like weather, race organizers hoped to be salvaged by a good race; to have, if not impressive times on this flat and fast course, at least a memorable race.
That developed, at points, Sunday, as about 8,000 runners started at Daley Plaza downtown and wended their way through city streets.
"I was concentrating on running five-minute miles," he said.
His time works out to 5:00.8 mile splits.
Davies-Hale caught the second pack at 13 miles and met up with pre-race favorite Steve Binns, who lives 30 miles from Davies-Hale in England's West Midlands.
The two quickly went in different directions -- Binns falling back (he eventually dropped out) and Davies-Hale moving up.
At 22 miles, Davies-Hale was in the lead and in control, running smoothly and not appearing to labor under the bright sun.
Ed Eyestone was the first U.S. finisher in fourth, 2:14:57.
"To be honest with you, I was afraid of Cathy (O'Brien)," she said.
At 18 miles, Weidenbach came up on O'Brien, her New Balance teammate.
They shared some water, then Weidenbach tossed aside the water bottle and put on a surge that left O'Brien flat.
It was also where dozens of her family members and friends were posted.
Even the 2:28 is respectable -- only five U.S. women have run under 2:30.
"I guess when you are having a good day, nothing is going to get you down," she said.
Davies-Hale, a former plumber from Rugeley, Straffordshire, seemed bemused by the attention and nonplussed that he had just won $50,000 in prize money.
About as far as he seemed willing to go, on the celebrity scale, was to say he had pitched the plumbing job.
Davies-Hale may have shown a liking for running in heat when he won the Boulder Bolder that year in terrific heat.
He was a 1984 Olympian in the steeplechase and, on the advice of others, moved up to 5,000 and 10,000 meters.
"I've already had a great track season," Davies-Hale said.
but I really want to get back on the track."
Marathon Notes Race organizers insist that this race is at a world-class level, especially pointing to the world's richest purse.
That may be so, but all major marathons have drug testing and Chicago has none.
Scot Hellebuyck won the men's wheelchair race in 1:45:30.
Ann Cody Morris won the women's wheelchair race in 1:58:51.
