Introduction: The brutal beating of Rodney Glen King by Los Angelespolicemen offers convincing evidence that a code of silenceexists within that department, but it also illustrates asimilar reluctance of the nation's police chiefs to criticizea fellow chief.
Four officers took turns kicking and beatingan unresisting victim for more than two minutes.
Thesecriminals in uniform would not have dared their brutality hadthey feared that any of the 17 other police officers watchingwould report their criminal actions.
Blatant racist jokes and comments about the beating on thepolice communications system make it hard to believe thatthis was an "aberration" as Chief Daryl Gates claims.
Yet we, his fellow police chiefs, have for years remainedsilent about Mr. Gates, who yesterday was put on a 60-dayleave by the Los Angeles Police Commission.
Gates has made public statements clearly at odds with thenew concept of community policing, in which officers workwith citizens to improve neighborhoods and prevent crime.
Afew years ago Chief Gates referred to gang members as "dirtylittle cowards," and warned them that "there is resoundingapplause to every fall of the hammer."
Indeed theRambo-like challenge did not lower violence, and may haveincreased it.
Hundreds of gang homicides occur every year inLos Angeles despite sweeps by the city's police.
But this kind of reasoning isforeign to a man who publicly claimed that his SWAT teamcould free the Iranian hostages.
The Police Corps wouldsend idealistic young people, including minorities, to servea three -- or four -- year tour of duty after collegegraduation in return for federal funding of their educations.
Mr. Gates opposed the Police Corps because its members wouldnot be professionals.
Many chiefs openly disagreed with Mr. Gates when heopposed the Police Corps Bill in Congress.
We should be asopenly critical of his other statements.
For example, Mr. Gates once said that blacks were more susceptible than"normal people" to chokeholds.
More recently, he describedthe killer of a policewoman as an "El Salvadoran, whoshouldn't have been here. "
Mr. Gates's statement did nothing to lessenthe tragedy of the fallen officer, but like his statementabout blacks, it gave comfort to bigots within and outsidethe department.
And it hardly reduced conflict in a citywhere the majority of the population is made up of minoritieswho need and deserve police protection, whether or not theyare citizens.
The unit had advance knowledge that crimeswere about to occur, but often stayed outside and letrobberies occur, even though innocent retailers and customerswere put at risk.
Last year Los Angeles paid $3 million to 52 residents ofan apartment complex ransacked by police.
Even more recently, Mr. Gates told theSenate that "casual drug users should be taken out and shot.
And his initial reaction on television to the Rodney Kingbrutality tapes was defensive.
Mayor Tom Bradley told themedia that such conduct wouldn't be tolerated, and that thewrongdoers would be sought out for punishment.
But condemnation of misconduct and excessive force shouldhave been a constant message from the command staff beforethe brutality, and not an afterthought.
Yet, it's hard toimagine commanders preaching restraint in light of thechief's constant belligerent pronouncements.
Public opinion polls in Los Angeles show themajority of people believe police brutality is common, andthey disapprove of the way Mr. Gates has done his job.
Whenhe characterizes such opposition as cop-haters, he embittershis department and to some extent all police.
Mr. Gates's military style of policing is at odds withthat in the rest of the country, and it's about time policeleaders publicly repudiated it.
It is hard to see how the LosAngeles Police Department can regain credibility unless DarylGates's leave becomes permanent.
It has cast a cloud over policing that won't belifted until police chiefs drop their own code of silence andspeak out against one of their own's peculiar philosophy ofpolicing.
