Introduction:While more than a thousand runners were treated to an evening of comedy, music and magic at Saturday night's carbo load dinner on Mission Bay, Ernesto Beatriz Martinez of Mexico City was treated to a bumpy 12 1/2-hour bus ride from his hometown to border town Tijuana.
Two hours, 16 minutes and 12 seconds later, in only his second marathon -- his first was this event last year when he finished eighth -- Beatriz Martinez crossed the finish line 39 seconds ahead of South African Mark Plaatjes, now of Lake Forest, Ill. "I wasn't 100% sure I'd win," he said through an interpreter, "but I had much confidence that I'd do well.
Marie Rollins, a member of the 1988 Irish Olympic team and now of Glendale, kicked her race up a gear after the 16th mile and won the women's race in 2:39:05, handily defeating hometown favorite Mindy Ireland (2:42:18) of Escondido.
It was the first marathon Rollins has completed this year, after dropping out of the New York City Marathon four weeks ago in mile 18 because of stomach cramps.
Beatriz Martinez and Rollins received $5,000 each for their victories.
And for Beatriz Martinez, who ran cross country for San Diego City College in 1988, he might as well have won the lottery.
This was a man who earlier this week was running in tattered shoes and had a TV raffled in his honor to raise the $180 required to cover transportation, the entrance fee and other expenses.
"I want to help my family and friends who raised the money for me," said Beatriz Martinez, a school teacher in Mexico City.
Kurtis was originally awarded third place, but miscommunication somewhere along the 26.2-mile course gave Castillo third in his first marathon and moved Kurtis to fourth.
According to Dr. Bill Burke, co-owner of the marathon, Castillo was told several times that he was running the marathon course, but he decided to continue.
"I traveled too much to get here to go home and say I went the wrong way," Castillo said, also using an interpreter.
There was some question that Castillo hadn't finished the entire race as reporters and photographers on the lead vehicle didn't see him for several miles.
But Plaatjes said it was because he and Casillas, who eventually dropped out at mile 18, were so far ahead of the lead pack of Plaatjes, Danny Bustos, Dick LeDoux, Kurtis and Leodigard Martin. "
We saw them way ahead of us," said Plaatjes.
"I told them (Bustos, LeDoux and Martin) not to worry about me, I'm not racing, but they better go catch the other guys.
The first time we caught them was at 18 miles."
Bustos of Las Vegas, N.M., led for the first 14 miles, followed closely by Plaatjes, Beatriz Martinez and LeDoux.
Marathon Notes Marie Rollins' time is the fourth best for women in San Diego-area marathon history and breaks Chantal Best's 1988 race record of 2:42:22.
Best decided late Saturday to run the marathon, but dropped out after 18 miles .
.San Diego's Steve McCormack finished sixth, 10 minutes behind fifth place LeDoux, with a 2:29:08. .
