The record $3.9 billion drought relief program of 1988, hailedas salvation for small farmers devastated by a brutal dry spell,became much more _ an unexpected, election-year windfall forthousands of farmers who collected millions of dollars for nature'snormal quirks.
An Associated Press study conducted over seven months found thedrought relief bill paid cash to farmers for everything fromhail-damaged kiwi fruit in California to heat-stressed radicchio inMassachusetts, rain-bloated tomatoes in New Jersey and washed-outbird seed in Colorado.
Congress began with abill to aid drought victims.
Next came ``heat,'' an addition from the Agriculture Department.
By the time checks were being written at the county level, theAP found, fellow farmers elected to locally administer federalagriculture programs were approving claims for such common perilsas insects, sand, wind, cold and fungus, even ``ineffectiveherbicide.''
None of those conditions should have been ruled eligible,administrators in Washington say.
``We lucked out last year on account of the boys up north,''said Travis Turnipseed, a Levelland, Texas, cotton farmer who's hadhail damage 23 out of the last 28 years, but collected cash for thefirst time in 1988.
In the end, drought relief became a one-time bonus for thousandsof farmers in parts of the country that in 1988 generally enjoyedgood crops at higher prices and wouldn't have qualified as disasterareas, including parts of California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas,Oklahoma, Maryland and New Jersey.
Although some producers appeared to have violated eligibilityrequirements _ exceeding the allowed gross annual income, forexample _ their requests for aid were approved anyway by localofficials.
Most farmers simply took advantage of a generousprogram.
``It was there, so I took it,'' said Melvin Przilas, a wheat andcorn farmer in the Texas Panhandle who collected $2,254 becausehail and Russian wheat aphids damaged his 1,265-acre irrigatedfarm, which grosses $300,000 to $400,000 a year.
Loopholes were tightened in 1989's smaller $1billion drought relief program.
``Some farmers just got grandfathered in, that's true,'' saidDan Shaw, deputy administrator of the Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service, which administers payment programs forthe Agriculture Department.
Butthat is part of the beast I guess that was created.
Whenever you dothis for the whole nation, there are some people that luck out.''
The AP found some farmers who did better than just luck out.
Those growers profited by ``triple-dipping'': reaping cropinsurance as well as drought aid on damaged crops, then replantingthe same ground for a successful harvest _ all perfectly legalunder the 1988 program.
In several cases, corporations ineligible for drought reliefbecause of the bill's $2 million cutoff on gross annual incomecollected anyway because they owned a stake in a farm.
Santa Fe Pacific Co., the railroad giant with annual revenue of$3 billion, received a check through its energy division.
Pryslak Farms of Great Meadows, N.J., a $9 million-a-yearproduce, garden and truck farming operation, collected $100,000 forlosses on endive, escarole and leaf lettuce because the localAgriculture Department official said he thought the $2 millionceiling applied to just the vegetable operation.
Wrong, say Washington officials _ the ceiling applies to revenuefrom all operations.
In North Dakota, the hardest-hit state, farmers lost anestimated $1.1 billion to the drought, but direct federal aid cutthat by 36 percent, to $706 million.
In Iowa the aid, calculated bythe federal government at $335 million, went a long way, stateagriculture secretary Dale Cochran said.
Without that money, ``it would have meant substantially morelosses to Main Street,'' Cochran said.
``Drought legislation savedbusinesses from having to close their doors.''
To examine the program, the AP interviewed agriculture expertsin 21 states then chose 14 states whose rainfall data and droughtpayments were matched county by county in a computer database.
Fromthose results, the AP selected 120 counties for further study.
Because much of the ASCS paperwork never leaves the counties,reporters then traveled to 22 county offices in eight states toexamine more detailed drought program files for 346 specificfarmers, also available under the FOIA.
One such farmer was Don Gresham, who raises cotton on 4,000acres near Levelland.
Gresham readily offers that he and his sonoperate their farms under five different names precisely because offederal payment limitations _ in the case of drought aid, $100,000per farmer.
According to government program formulas, Gresham grossed nearly$100,000 more than had he grown his cotton successfully.
