A 'not this Nafta' rally on Saturday provided little competition for thecollege 'game of the century' - Florida State University against Notre Dame.
They came promptly at two in the afternoon and by three most were gone.
Theorganisers said they were sending a message to Virginia's three waveringcongressmen that a 'yes' vote on Nafta in the House on Wednesday would be'remembered in November'.
Itputs decision-making in the hands of international panels, which underminesour judicial system.'
He says he is concerned about the loss of Virginia'stax base as companies move production to Mexico and place continuousdownward pressure on wages.
'The administration is selling everything it can to every congressman itcan.
Mr Josh Greenwood, owner of a small hydroelectric company, says: 'I mightrun against my congressman myself.
Mr Greenwood's congressman, Norman Sisisky, spent Friday meeting groups fromboth sides. '
He is trying to sort through the misleading information,' sayshis press secretary.
Mr Ralph Dombrower,a Perot devotee, brought the results of an interactive computer poll showinga growing isolationism among American voters.
'The public is becoming less inclined to see the US as arbiter of worldwidehuman behaviour and wishes to get out of our foreign policy involvements,'he says.
The Virginia business community began a pro-Nafta lobbying effort lastMarch. '
We were going against a tide ofmisinformation,' says Ms Kathy Otts, co-captain of Virginians For Nafta.
Company employees were exhorted to write or call their congressman.
Constituents only have votes togive, and it seems these congressmen are having a hard time hearing theirmessage,' the cover page said.
On Friday, after the fifth pro-Nafta congressman announced his position, adispirited Lorrie Beckwith, an opposition organiser, said her campaign hadbeen hindered early on by a lack of unity.
President Bill Clinton seemed tobe buying off the undecided congressmen.
One was reported to have beenpromised that a manufacturing research centre would be located in hisdistrict.
A visit to Congressman Sisiskyhad not been encouraging, says Mr Beckwith.
'He says he had a bad feeling about the agreement in his gut.
