Do you sense an outbreak of sanity about gun control?
There was retired Chief Justice Warren Burger preaching sacrilege on the cover of Parade magazine a couple of weeks ago.
A Time Magazine/Cable News Network poll reports that 87% of gun owners themselves favor a seven-day waiting period for handgun purchases; three-quarters favor registration of semi-automatic weapons and handguns, and half favor registration of rifles and shotguns.
Most right thinkers take comfort in that funny stuff about the militia.
Since the amendment's stated purpose is arming state militias, they reason, it creates no individual right to own a gun.
That reasoning is good enough for the ACLU.
But would civil-libertarians be so stinting about an amendment they felt more fond of?
But liberals reject the notion that free speech is therefore limited to political topics, even broadly defined.
True, that purpose is not inscribed in the amendment itself.
But why leap to the conclusion that a broadly worded constitutional freedom ("the right of the people to keep and bear arms") is narrowly limited by its stated purpose, unless you're trying to explain it away?
But Kates has other bullets in his belt.
In all these other cases, everyone agrees that it creates a right for individual citizens, not just some collective right of states as a whole.
Kates also marshals impressive historical evidence that the Second Amendment, like other Bill of Rights protections, was intended to incorporate English common law rights of the time, which pretty clearly included the right to keep a gun in your home for reasons having nothing to do with the militia.
If there is a good reply to Kates's fusillade, the controllers haven't made it.
Working from that decision and the common law, Kates says the amendment's protection should be limited to weapons "in common use among law-abiding people," useful for law enforcement or personal defense, and lineally descended from weapons known to the Framers.
He adds that they must be light enough for an ordinary person to carry ("bear"), and even that they can't be especially "dangerous or unusual."
He says that the amendment places no limit on mandatory registration or laws against concealed weapons in public.
This list seems quite reasonable and moderate, though where it all comes from is not clear.
In suggesting, for example, that it would be fine to ban automatic rifles but not semi-automatics, Kates is slicing the constitutional salami pretty thin.
But in what I suspect was the main purpose of his exercise -- establishing that a flat ban on handguns would be hard to justify under the Constitution -- Kates builds a distressingly good case.
The downside of having those rights inscribed in a Constitution, protected from the whims of majority rule, is that they can't be re-defined as life changes.
It would be remarkable indeed if none of the Bill of Rights became less sensible and more burdensome with time.
