Mr. Hart and a Republican cohort, Douglas Bailey,conducted six focus groups in July in three states --Illinois, Florida and Massachusetts -- to get a deeperfeeling of public opinion.
But as Mr. Hart summarized their findings, the discussionquickly centered on the dismay and disgust many voters feelabout politics and government these days.
The reaction in theroom was one of "deep depression," according to oneparticipant.
Averagecitizens, the pollsters found, believe they "simply are notbeing heard in Washington," and more and more are losingconfidence in the electoral system as a means of influencinggovernment.
Normally, when Republicans have a good year, Democrats'average victory margin declines, and vice versa.
But in 1990,voters declared a plague on both parties' houses,underscoring what polls and other focus groups demonstrate:The disaffection with politicians isn't ideological.
Plainly, Congress can best address this frustration bydoing a better job on the issues bothering people-healthcare, taxes, jobs.
But there's little consensus among eitherpoliticians or the voters themselves on these issues.
It caneliminate its more indefensible perquisites, such as the freeprescription drugs.
More important, lawmakers ought tooverhaul the disgraceful campaign-finance system to makecongressional elections more competitive, and to reduce therole of money and influence peddlers in campaigns.
But there also have to be more fundamental changes inCongress's cozy arrangements.
Apowerful antidote would be to limit committee service, whichwould have few of the political and constitutional drawbacksof term limits.
The case is well articulated by two of the mostexperienced congressional observers: Richard Fenno, aUniversity of Rochester political scientist and author ofnumerous books on Congress, and Charles Ferris, an attorneywho served as chief counsel to both former Senate MajorityLeader Mike Mansfield and former House Speaker Thomas P.O'Neill.
While both men are deeply dismayed at the current state ofCongress, they see term limits as a cure worse than theillness. "
Argues Mr. Ferris: "Voters never should be preventedfrom electing a person who they think is the bestrepresentative of that community.
"But they see a lot of virtue in limiting committeeassignments.
Mr. Ferrisbelieves this would "put a vitality in the system" while notresulting, unlike overall term limits, in "a bunch ofneophytes who'd be more dependent on staff and lobbyists."Mr.
Ferris notes that the current system, in which alawmaker gets a cherished committee assignment in his firstor second term and then stays there for the rest of histenure, breeds staleness. "
Technology and economics and worlddynamics are moving so quickly, but many of these members,while very bright, are locked into outdated beliefs andapproaches," he says.
If lawmakers had to change areas ofexpertise every three or four terms, "they wouldn't have theluxury of being intellectually lazy.
"Currently, the Intelligence committees in both houses andthe House Budget Committee limit members to six or eightyears.
