Introduction:THERE are growing signs that Hurricane Andrew, unwelcome as it was for thedevastated inhabitants of Florida and Louisiana, may in the end do no harmto the re-election campaign of President George Bush.
This was brought home graphically by the president'sannouncement that Homestead Air Force base in Florida - a major localemployer virtually destroyed by Andrew  - would be rebuilt.
As if to underline the political benefit to the president, a Harris pollconducted from August 26 to September 1 yesterday showed Mr Bush with 45 percent support - behind Mr Clinton by just five points - reflecting a closerrace than other recent surveys.
With Mr Bush constantly in the headlines, Mr Clinton has been left on thesidelines, able to do little more than offer sympathy and sotto vocecriticism of the president's initial stumbling.
First responses were certainly found wanting, specifically in theperformance of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) set up byPresident Carter in 1979 to handle disasters such as Andrew.
FEMA has, underthe Republicans, become the ultimate patronage backwater, with, according toone congressional study, ten times as many political appointees as thetypical arm of government.
Its current head, Mr Wallace Stickney, is a New Hampshire politicalassociate of Mr John Sununu, the former state governor and White House chiefof staff.
Contrary to its brief, but confirming a prescient recent report bya House committee that Mr Stickney was 'uninterested in substantiveprogrammes', FEMA was caught completely unprepared by Andrew, resulting inunseemly disputes between state and federal authorities over who did what inbringing relief.
It was Mr Baker who reshuffled the president's campaign schedule to makeroom for visits to the devastated areas and who pushed for a bigger role forthe previously obscure Mr Card.
But both may be presented by a president as being in thenational interest because they guarantee employment, which is what theelection is largely about.
US insurers expect to pay out around Dollars 500m in claims as a result ofdamage caused by Hurricane Andrew in Louisiana, the American InsuranceServices Group said yesterday, Nikki Tait reports.
