Introduction:IT IS ironic that there is an unprecedented, greedy rush for diamonds byminers in Angola and Canada precisely at a time when the diamond business isin turmoil and questions are inevitably being asked about the ability of theworld's most successful cartel to keep its tight grip on the market.
Stakers are using helicopters because each claim area is so large andprospectors have claimed every piece of land within 300 km (185 miles) ofthe discovery.
In spite of all this hectic activity, it is very unlikely that anyone willfind enough big diamonds to make the development of Canada's first diamondmine worthwhile.
More than Dollars 1m-worth of gem diamonds a day arebeing smuggled out of that country for sale in Antwerp.
As well as experienced miners, many soldiers who could not find civilianjobs have made their way to the diamond areas.
Did Unita, Angola'srebel movement, build up a stockpile which is now being released?
IsEndiama, Angola's state-owned diamond company, implicated in some way?
Inthe murky world of diamond dealing such rumours abound.
De Beers probably knows the answers because its intelligence network isremarkable.
What is also remarkable is that all those scrambling for diamonds in Angolaor dropping out of the skies to stake expensive claims in Canada take it forgranted that the diamond cartel will be able to continue to keep prices upand make all their efforts worthwhile.
The cartel has survived partly because nobody needs diamonds.
They arecomposed of very hard carbon so they can be useful for drilling holes intough material, but there are substitutes for this use.
Gem diamonds aresolely for decoration and serve no useful purpose.
The CSO has been mopping up as many of the smuggled Angolan diamonds aspossible to stop havoc being created in a business already sufferingseverely from soggy demand in the US and Japan, the two biggest markets,which share about two-thirds of demand between them.
De Beers says that, because times are tough.
it will probably have to cutits annual dividend payment for the first time since 1981.
It has also toldthe producers to cut deliveries by 25 per cent - something the CSO contractspermit at times of stress.
De Beers releases a controlled stream of rough diamonds to the marketthrough 'sights' offered by the CSO ten times a year to about 160 selectedbuyers.
They are offered boxes of diamonds, each worth between Dollars500,000 and Dollars 25m.
In bad times like this, I sometimes wishthat we could.
The fact is that the level of world diamond production, whichis carried on in many countries, cannot be controlled.
Diamond prices cannotbe fixed artificially but have to be set at a level which allows productionand consumption to be equated.
'What the CSO for many years has done successfully, is to operate a bufferpool, stocking diamonds in bad times and liquidating its stocks when demandis in excess of the level of supply.
It was atime of galloping inflation, a weak dollar and low interest rates.
Merchants, particularly in Israel, stockpiled diamonds on borrowed money asa hedge against inflation and when recession hit they had to dump diamondsfaster than the Central Selling Organisation could mop them up.
De Beers has taken good care that merchant stocks have never again beenbuilt for speculative reasons, frequently going to the banks, the potentialfinanciers of stockpiling operations, to 'educate' them about the way thediamond market works.
Underlying the boom was phenomenal growth in demandfor diamonds in Japan where lack of living space encourages people todisplay their wealth by buying small but expensive items.
The CSO boostedthe trend with clever promotion so that today diamond engagement rings areregularly exchanged in Japan whereas forthcoming marriages traditionallywere celebrated over a cup of rice wine.
It must be open to question whether another Japan can be found to lift thediamond market as the present recession ends.
'By mopping up Angolan supplies we can say that more of the world's roughdiamonds are passing through the CSO than ever before,' he says. '
Byapplying the deferred purchases clauses in our contracts with producers weare applying the right medicine to ensure that demand matches supply andthat the diamond market will remain stable'.The future of De Beers' diamond operations in Namibia were discussed withthe government there yesterday.
In the past there have been suggestions thatCDM, De Beers' wholly-owned subsidiary, might be at least partlynationalised.
CDM, has diamond mining operations over a coastal areaextending 100 km north of the Orange River and recently brought the Auchasand Elizabeth Bay mines into production.
12South Africa         8.2      8.5       9.6South America 1.4      0.8         1Angola               1.3 1.3 0.9Others               1.8      2.1 2.35 ------------------------------------------------Source: Metals &amp; Minerals Annual Review ------------------------------------------------
