Introduction: To economists, term limits sound like minimum wages, rentcontrols and similar interferences with free markets.
What is going on here?One argument is that incumbent politicians have unfairadvantages in elections because of their ready access tocampaign funds, staff, mailing and travel privileges, mediapublicity, and so on.
Hence, the electorate is fooledsystematically into supporting incumbents even when they areinferior to their challengers.
This argument is similar tothe Galbraith-like view that big corporations with massiveadvertising budgets can consistently dupe their customersinto buying inferior products.
Supporters of free markets andthe capitalistic system reject this message because they havefaith in the self-interested consumer to discipline thecompanies that do not deliver the goods.
Advocates of thedemocratic electoral process ought to have similar confidencein the public.
Another argument is that a citizen Congress with itscontinuing flow of fresh faces into Washington would resultin better government than that provided by representativeswith lengthy tenure.
If the publicvoted against satisfactory performers just to install a newface, then officeholders would have less incentive to behaveand the system would work badly.
If we ever see a 50% re-election rate,then there really would be reason to worry.
A problem with term limits is that it createsmore lame ducks, who are less responsive to the desires ofthe electorate.
Much has been made of Alexander Hamilton'sreflections on this point in Federalist 72: "One ill effectof the exclusion {from re-election} would be a diminution ofthe inducements to good behavior."
Some aspects of this power, such as greater experience withgovernmental programs, are desirable; others, such as theincreased ability to extract funds from interest groups, arenot.
Even if seniority is a net cost in the aggregate, however,each district has an incentive to re-elect its own incumbent(and would if possible vote against the incumbents from otherdistricts) because the representative's relative senioritytranslates into a large share of governmental largess.
As an example, the votersof Washington state recently rejected a proposal that wouldhave limited the seniority of their congressionalrepresentatives relative to those of other states.
Yet thesame voters likely would have approved a proposal thatlimited the terms of all Congressional representatives, notjust those from Washington.
Changes in the seniority system may therefore be asuperior alternative to term limits.
The seniority system could be changedonly by getting Congress to alter its own rules (as it has attimes in the past) or else by constitutional amendment, whichwould, from a practical standpoint, also have to initiate inCongress.
It does not seem tomatter much -- it may even be detrimental -- if the contentof a Civil Rights Act actually has something to do with civilrights.
These argumentsparallel the benefits from worker seniority in firms (or,indeed, the usefulness of a parole system as a carrot to helpcontrol inmates in prisons).
The formal system of seniorityis also only a part of the story; members' increasingfamiliarity with interest groups is a kind of seniority thatwould not be eliminated by changes in the rules for committeeassignments, staffing and so on.
Voters do not have to worry that rejecting theirincumbent puts them at a disadvantage relative to othervoters' incumbents, so the electorate can properly weighexperience, fresh ideas, the value of rewarding satisfactoryperformance in office, and so on.
The only defense forexecutive term limits is that the electorate needs to beprotected against itself, an argument which, if true, wouldmean that democracy was seriously flawed and would work muchless well than it seems to.
)The origins of these limits may have more to do withcompetition between legislative and executive branches thanwith a desire to improve public policy.
Theanswer, if one holds constant geographical region and thelevel of per capita income in 1960, is that states with termlimits experienced slightly below average growth ofper-capita income over the last 30 years but were also alittle below average in the fraction of state product thatwent to state and local government expenditures.
Notsurprisingly, the main message is that executive term limitsare not an important determinant of economic growth or statespending.
Executive term limits are therefore a bad idea, but oneshould not expect vastly better performance at the state ornational level from the elimination of these restrictions.
