But the Senate already has voted to force the Census Bureau to exclude illegal immigrants in preparing tallies for congressional reapportionment.
"It is wrong to apportion congressional seats by counting people who would be deported if our immigration laws were enforced," Rep. Thomas Petri (R., Wis.) said in a recent House debate.
Replied Rep. Jim Kolbe (R., Ariz.): " A very clear reading of the Constitution says that we shall count all those who are present."
Although the debate is often couched in constitutional arguments, it's largely driven by geography.
"It boils down to regional politics," says Arturo Vargas, census-program director for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, one of several Hispanic organizations lobbying in favor of counting illegal immigrants.
Counting illegal immigrants in 1990 is likely to mean one less seat in the House for Pennsylvania and one more for California, according to the private Population Reference Bureau.
The Census Bureau's chief antagonist in the Senate, Sen. Richard Shelby (D., Ala.), says seats for Connecticut, Michigan, North Carolina and Alabama also are at risk.
On the other hand, Texas, Florida and New York could benefit. "
The Census Bureau, based on comparisons of its data with figures kept by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, estimates that it counted about two million illegal immigrants in 1980, half of them in California.
Organizations that represent Hispanics are particularly worried about the congressional campaign.
They fear that any attempt to ascertain the legal status of respondents will exacerbate difficulties the Census Bureau already faces in accurately counting Hispanics and blacks. "
As it is, the Census Bureau has a tremendous challenge in trying to convince everybody that the census is confidential," Mr. Vargas says.
"We tell people: Put your name down on the census form.
We won't report you to the housing authority {if there are too many occupants}," says Peter Bonpanne, an assistant director.
"If they see a lot of questions on there about somebody's legal status, that could hurt all kinds of people's participation."
Although the 106 million census forms can be reprinted if Congress acts soon, wording a question so that illegal immigrants answer accurately is a challenge, Mr. Bonpanne says.
The bureau already plans to ask one in six respondents if they are citizens.
To satisfy congressional critics, it would have to ask everyone that question, and then ask the legal status of anyone who isn't a citizen.
"We're spending billions on the census, and the only thing we get is a bunch of belly-aching about how difficult it will be," he complains.
The House did open the door to an amendment to a spending bill that would have barred census takers from "knowingly" counting any illegal immigrants, but the provision was quickly sidetracked on procedural grounds.
All sides in the debate predict a lawsuit no matter what Congress does.
A similar suit was dismissed this year when a federal district judge in Pittsburgh ruled that the states that sued -- Pennsylvania, Kansas and Alabama -- couldn't show they had been harmed.
Only "Indians not taxed" were excluded, but no one has fallen into that category since 1940.
They wrote, for instance, that only those who have been "seven years a citizen of the United States" can serve in the House.
