Introduction: Forecasters preparing for Thursday'sopening of the Atlantic hurricane season wish they could predictthe arrival of new technological help they say may be crucial toever-growing coastal populations.
The Air Force has agreed to fly hurricane reconnaissance flightsfor two more years, but has made it clear it plans to phase out themissions.
``We just have nothing right now to lean on,'' says KenMcKinnon, a spokesman for U.S. Rep. Tom Lewis of North Palm Beach,Fla.
, who has introduced a bill in Congress to keep hurricanehunters flying at least another five years.
``We've got onesatellite and they're telling us it'll do the job.
``We have in the lastfew years examined our need for manned weather reconnaissance andfeel there's no real compelling military reason,'' said spokesmanLt.
Besides the flights, forecasters depend on radar and satellitedata.
But they've been due fora long time and aren't expected before late 1990.
``We may be in an upswing,'' he said, ``possibly back to thepattern of the '40s, '50s and '60s when we had a tremendous numberof landfall hurricanes.''
Max Mayfield, hurricane specialist at the National WeatherService in Miami, said experts don't known enough yet abouthurricanes to tell if this is just a peak in activity, or a returnto the 50s and 60s.
``I spoke to about 5,000 people on the west coast of Florida,''Sheets said.
``Ninety-plus percent of them were from the Midwest orNortheast and had just come to Florida.
They really have verylittle concept of what a hurricane is.''
During the average Atlantic hurricane season, which stretchesfrom June through the end of November, six tropical storms willgrow into hurricanes, with heavy rains and winds of 74 mph.
Donna, in 1960, struck the Florida Keys at Marathon, then rakedacross Naples and Fort Myers before weakening inland.
Last season, 505 people died in Atlantic hurricanes, includingGilbert and Joan.
The storm caused mudslides,floods and other damage in Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Colombia andPanama.
