Introduction:   Shining Path guerrillas, who started theirbloody uprising in the mountains eight years ago, are moving intothe shantytowns that encircle the capital like a noose.
His Maoist rebels, once secretive fanatics, are becoming apolitical force that seeks public support in Huaycan and the othermakeshift communities where two-thirds of Lima's 7 million peoplescrape along.
Most residents are poor migrants from the violent highlands wherethe rebel movement was born.
They make ideal recruits for theShining Path _ Sendero Luminoso in Spanish.
Shining Path's move into a more public role, and through most ofPeru from its Andean base in Ayacucho province, has coincided witheconomic collapse and annual inflation of nearly 2,000 percent.
More than 12,000 people have been killed in the civil war, mostof them Andean peasants slain by rebels or security forces, andofficial figures put damage to the shattered economy at $10 billion.
The guerrillas are believed to have only about 5,000 armedcombatants, so they do not appear close to seizing power, but thereis increasing pessimism about the prospects of controlling them.
``Most evaluations of Sendero Luminoso's eight-year expansionunder the democratic system ... have become increasingly grim,'' theAndean Report, a respected economic journal, said recently.
One reason the movement grows is its appeal to Peru's Indians,subjected for centuries to scorn and discrimination by the whiteruling elite.
The most striking development of the last 18 months has been theShining Path's move into public view in this grimy capital on SouthAmerica's Pacific coast.
Rebels organize support groups in the slums, infiltrate laborunions, organize marches, spread their message of revolution withthe aid of a sympathetic daily newspaper and agitate amonguniversity students.
They say this clouds distinctions between thelegal and illegal left, making it move difficult to combat the rebelmovement.
``Sendero is seeking semi-legal status as a way of winningmilitants and sympathizers, while at the same time generating aconfusing situation in which the security forces indiscrimatelyrepress members of the legal left along with leftist insurgents,'' aranking police official said privately.
Guzman, a Marxist philosophy professor, founded Sendero Luminosoin 1970 in Ayacucho, an Andean state capital 230 miles southeast ofLima where he had built a following at the University of Huamanga.
Followers call Guzman, 54, ``the fourth sword of Marxism'' afterMarx, Lenin and Mao.
His movement, a splinter group of the Communist Party, gatheredstrength in Indian communities of the southern Andes for 10 yearsbefore launching its guerrilla war.
The final stage, he said, would be a popular uprising against arepressive military regime.
Shining Path has infiltrated 167 unions and neighborhoodassociations in the Lima slums this year, says a confidentialInterior Ministry report obtained by The Associated Press.
Cardinal Juan Landazuri of the Roman Catholic Church said:``Priests tell me that young people in the shantytowns are goingover to Sendero.
I have been in a shantytown where there is aShining Path group, and the police are doing nothing about it.''
Residents were suspicious and uncommunicative when an AssociatedPress reporter visited, except for three 10-year-old boys at theentrance who laughed and waved red flags with the Shining Path'shammer-and-sickle emblem.
The Central Highway passes through what looks like a militaryzone.
Guerrillas killed three plant managers in 1988 who were involvedin labor disputes.
``I doubt if you'll find any union leader ... who will declare heis a Senderista, but I'll bet you'll find many who are afraid to sayanything against Sendero,'' an American labor adviser said oncondition of anonymity.
The highway ties Lima to the agricultural lands of the centralAndes and Peru's most important mines, where unions threatened bythe Shining Path have conducted a strike since late October thatcosts millions of dollars a day in export earnings.
