Introduction:LIMA -- On June 4, I was among a group of journalists whowere told that the war against the Shining Path ("SenderoLuminoso") guerrillas had almost been won.
Lucky punchessometimes win wars, and maybe this was the case.
We had beenallowed into a "safe house" that, according to InteriorMinister Agustin Mantilla, had been used as headquarters bythe leaders of the Marxist guerrilla movement.
Interior Ministryspokesman Fernando Yavera joked that this find was going toput Shining Path watchers (such as myself) out of business.
Alas, as it turned out this was not the rebelorganization's headquarters, nor its central nervous system,but more of an archive and memorabilia repository.
Nevertheless, it was a very important and unexpected policecoup against the Shining Path -- one that probably could havebrought dramatic results if President Alan Garcia had notdecided to make public the operation so soon after the firstpolice intervention, in order to score a quick propagandagain.
There is not much of a dispute on the basic data, however.
Its first actions were cautious, modest andoften ludicrous in a crazy way (like hanging dogs fromlampposts, with scribbled insults over them to ChineseCommunist martyrs).
While President Fernando Belaunde's regime did what itcould to maintain democratic legality at first, it was quiteunprepared to deal with any insurgency -- especially with onethat had been meticulously planned and organized severalyears before the first shot was fired.
Damages are estimated at $16billion, or about 85% of Peru's annual gross nationalproduct.
There are no kind words for Mr. Garcia, on the other hand.
In the first weeks of his mandate, he made several rightmoves -- like emphasizing his role as commander in chief ofthe armed forces and reorganizing the corruption-riddenpolice.
But dialogue wasdisdainfully rejected: Dozens of these professionals wereassassinated, and the armed forces slowed down their actions,while the rebels made largely unimpeded progress.
Then, Mr. Garcia tried a tougher approach, andhuman-rights violations surged to their current level.
Midpoint during his term, Mr. Garcia lost all hopeof defeating the Shining Path, and decided just to coexistwith it, says Rafael Merino, a respected analyst on securitymatters.
Not even in that was Mr. Garcia successful, as violenceclimbed steadily during the second half of his term.
In 1988,1,986 people were killed as a result of insurgent orcounterinsurgent actions; in 1989, 3,198 were killed; and1,730 during the first six months of 1990.How well is Mr. Fujimori expected to deal with theinsurgency?
His campaign pitch advocated an approach closelyresembling that of Mr. Garcia's first year.
According toFrancisco Loayza, Mr. Fujimori's adviser on internal-securitymatters, military actions against the Shining Path should besubordinated to economic-development initiatives.
Mr. Loayza says that President Garcia'sapproach failed because of corruption and ineptitude.
This is only wishful thinking, according to Mr. Merino:"If President Fujimori thinks he'll finish the war throughthose `pacification' policies, it will be like riding intobattle with no better dress or weapons than a tuxedo.
"Actually, Mr. Fujimori might end up implementing internalwar policies that would be quite different from thoseadvocated during his campaign.
"Even if Mr. Fujimori proves to be a quick learner, he willhave his work cut out for him.
Running against all majortrends of contemporary history, the insurgents have followedShining Path founder Abimael Guzman with the commitment thatthe faithful reserve for their prophet.
This was evident whenwalking through their safe house in Lima.
