Introduction:The Reagan administration moved to deal with the worsening drought, and a top trade official said that farm export subsidies may have to be curbed.
Concern that the drought could fuel inflation drove stocks and bonds sharply lower yesterday.
While he wouldn't predict what kind of disaster relief might be authorized, Mr. Fitzwater said the drought "certainly is going to drive up food prices.
At a news briefing, Special Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter warned that the administration may have to curb its so-called export enhancement program if the drought becomes even worse.
This program is designed to boost farm exports by reimbursing U.S. exporters for the difference between the prices they receive for grain and other commodities in world markets and higher U.S. prices. "
Clearly, we will have to appraise very carefully the desirability of using export enhancement funds at a time when (U.S.) supplies are unpredictable," Mr. Yeutter said.
Shrinking soybean stockpiles and soaring prices have stirred speculation that the government may impose an embargo on exports of soybeans and soybean products.
But Mr. Yeutter said he would "vigorously" oppose any embargo on U.S. soybean exports.
Hefty government subsidies on last year's strong harvests put a record amount of cash into farmers pockets.
But bankers that lend to farmers suddenly are worrying anew about their borrower's financial health.
Farm equipment makers say they are concerned that sales could suffer.
Realtors in rural areas say that land prices, which had just begun to turn around, may be affected.
For many, the drought couldn't come at a worse time.
"This is probably putting a damper on one of the most optimistic years in the last eight years," says Richard Hahn, president and chief executive of an Omaha, Neb.-based farm management concern.
Now, with farmers in many Midwest states expecting smaller harvests this year, these businesses are seeing their new-found trade evaporating.
Few in farming expect the drought to trigger an agricultural recession, although more farmers could go bankrupt because of it.
But all bets are off on how farmers will fare at the end of this year's harvests.
Bob Pfiefer, owner of a Massey-Ferguson farm equipment dealership in Sioux Falls, S.D., says he has already canceled some orders for fear that sales will soon begin dropping off.
If the drought continues, he says, "it could bring us to our knees again."
In Franklin, Tenn., implement dealer Larry Holt is slashing his fall orders by one-third, even though sales so far this year are up roughly 25%.
"It's already getting harder to sell farmers tractors because of the drought," says James K. Ashford, Case president and chief executive officer.
He said that if the drought continues, industrywide tractor sales could turn flat next year instead of climbing the 5% to 6% that was originally forecast for 1989.
Before the drought we expected a very solid year" for farm lenders, says Mark Drabenstott, an economist at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
Many rural lenders this spring were banking on farmers losing some of their post-farm crisis inhibitions about going into hock.
In Anadarko, Okla., bankers worry now that ranchers are going to make less money this year because crop damage is escalating the cost of feeding cattle. "
The drought is going to hurt us because it hurts the cattle market," says Lance Shenold, a vice president of Anadarko Bank &amp; Trust Co.
A big drop in harvests this year could squeeze investors who had planned on good yields to help pay their real estate loans.
Most of the farmers who have bought land recently did so for cash, but many of the urban investors got in on credit, real estate agents say.
Among all the uncertainty, however, some are looking for a silver lining.
He is hoping that drought damage and rising crop prices will fan inflationary fears so high that land again will be a hot commodity.
Some economists think high crop prices will spark more planting, which would benefit agribusiness, while others think farmers will start the next growing season more conservative.
Paul Prentice of Farm Sector Economics Associates, a forecasting concern, thinks the drought could so deplete U.S. stockpiles that the Agriculture Department would drop much of its farm crisis-era planting restrictions.
"I don't see us getting on a late '70s bandwagon," says Mr. Drabenstott of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
The decision by Mr. Lyng, the secretary of agriculture, to allow hay-mowing for 30 days on Conservation Reserve Program land came as farmers and ranchers in North Dakota, Minnesota and other states continued to sell off livestock in response to shortages of hay and other forage crops.
The department said it won't allow livestock-grazing on land in the soil-conservation program, under which farmers are paid to take erodible acreage out of crop production.
