Introduction:Of all the extravagant plans inspired by this week's solar eclipse, none beatsthe Earth Evacuation Project.
Participants in Mexico believe the totaleclipse, which will send a shadow racing from Hawaii to Brazil as the mooncrosses directly in front of the sun, will cause volcanic eruptions, signalingEarthlings to start bailing out on spaceships to the fourth dimension,according to Intergalactic Guardian command leader "Angel," who declined togive a last name.
Also on E-day, July 11, crowded cruise ships will lingeroff Mexico's Pacific Coast, and thousands of U.S. tourists will drive southinto Baja California, which, usually boasting clear skies, is being billed asthe world's most promising site from which to view nature's own light show.
Most visitors will be funneled in through therelatively small airport at Kailua.
Car rental companies have shipped in 3,000 or so extra cars.
But Mexico will host the biggest share of travelers, partly because of itseasy access from the United States and partly since the eclipse will lastlongest here: up to seven minutes, which is three more minutes than themaximum length in Hawaii.
This will also be the longest-lasting total eclipseuntil 2132, according to Alan Dyer, an associate editor at Astronomymagazine.
In pre-Colombian times, eclipses were viewed as bad omens by thesun-worshiping Aztecs.
As in Hawaii, Mexico couldprobably use some otherworldly intervention to cope with the scores ofthousands of tourists who have already started arriving.
All are now booked up, and authorities fear competition at campsites.
"We're worried that Californians will drive down on the spur of the moment,without taking water or fuel," said Marivi Lerdo, who promotes tourism toMexico in New York.
Although Hawaii's isolation will limit the size of thecrowds, locals are still predicting problems.
While authorities fret over infrastructure capacity, many Californians arepreparing to revel in a New Age wonderland.
"These are people who havenever, ever, missed a single episode of 'Star Trek,' " said Ken Stewart, whois planning to lead a caravan of 50 enthusiasts from San Diego to Cabo SanLucas, on the south tip of Baja.
Mexico's government is heavily involvedin eclipse planning, having formed an Intersecretarial Commission for theEclipse, which, among other things, is supposed to oversee production of asmany as 60 million protective lenses.
Newspapers here are carrying frequentreminders not to stare directly at the sun.
Twenty miles downhill, at TheCrystal Grotto in Honomu, Wendy Gilliam is selling pouches of three stonescalled corona crystals and advising people to "expose them to the energy"during the eclipse. "
As the moon passes over the sun, there are certain powervortexes here that are going to be opened up and awakened," she said.
Other safemethods: (check) Pieces of arc-welders' glass labeled  14 and available atwelding supply stores.
(check) Two or three layers of Mylar plastic heavily coated with aluminum.
Some stores are selling "eclipse glasses" made with this material.
COMINGTUESDAY IN SCIENCE &amp; MEDICINEAll the details about Thursday'seclipse, one of nature's most stunning events.
How to watch it,including directions for a pinhole projector.
