I find it unbelievablethat the government and their hand-picked advisers can go on telling thepublic there is no danger.
'The advisers, led by the government's chief medical officer Kenneth Calmanand chief veterinary officer Keith Meldrum, put out a detailed statement tojustify their view that last month's death of 65-year-old Duncan Templeman -following that of Peter Warhurst, 61, a year ago - showed 'no features thatgive cause for undue concern'.The official view is that the deaths are an unfortunate coincidence, eventhough it is statistically unlikely that two dairy farmers should contract adisease as rare as CJD.
Robert Will of Edinburgh's Western General Hospital,who has been monitoring CJD in the UK since 1990 on behalf of the healthdepartment, calculated that there was only a five per cent probability ofeven a single case occurring by chance among dairy farmers with BSE-affectedherds.
One argument put forward by the health department is that CJD has such along incubation period - typically 10 to 20 years - that clinical symptomswould not yet have appeared, even if BSE had triggered any cases of CJD.
Although sheep-derived feeds werebanned from sale in 1988, farmers apparently continued to use existingstocks for longer than the ministry had expected.
Veterinary experts say that almost all of the 102,000 confirmed BSE cases sofar can be attributed to scrapie-contaminated feed.
Recent research shows that the prion is an abnormal form of a protein thatis normally present in the brain (though its normal function is not yetknown).
Unlike viruses and bacteria, prions contain no genetic material oftheir own.
The prion may arise by a genetic mutation (spontaneous or inherited) in thehost animal.
Or - in the case of BSE - it may arrive from another animal.
Once in place in the victim's brain, it catalyses what John Collinge, aprion researcher at St Mary's Hospital Medical School, London, called a slow'chemical chain reaction', converting the normal protein into its ownabnormal form.
The prion molecule is folded in a way that makes it extremelystable and therefore difficult to destroy by conventional sterilisation.
Experiments show that BSE can be transmitted between species, for examplefrom cow to monkey, by injecting or eating large amounts of infected tissue.
