In reporting its estimated 1989 earnings, Exxon said it would take a $500-million charge in the fourth quarter for costs to clean up the spill of 11 million gallons of oil that spilled from the grounded tanker Exxon Valdez and fouled the shoreline of pristine Prince William Sound last March.
On Wednesday, Exxon spokesman William Smith upped the company's estimate of the spill's total costs so far -- costs to Exxon and others -- to "about $2 billion."
Other costs will be covered by "more than $400 million" in insurance, Smith said.
Analysts were not surprised at the additional charge, though "it was a lot bigger than I expected," said Joel D. Fischer, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York.
That raised Exxon's income by $535 million for the year.
Without the cleanup charge and accounting gain, Exxon said its net income for the year would have been $4.7 billion, down 10.6% from 1988, despite higher oil and gas prices.
"I think they did end the year on a strong note, largely because of the strength in crude and natural gas pricing," said Eugene Nowak, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in New York.
Still, Exxon's stock, whose performance has lagged behind that of other major oil firms, could suffer from continuing negative publicity surrounding the Valdez spill and the subsequent spill of 567,000 gallons of heating oil into the Arthur Kill waterway between New York and New Jersey on Jan. 2.
Smith declined to say what costs the new $500-million charge would cover.
The previous charges covered everything from wages to boat rentals to boots, as well as payments so far of $177 million in claims by fishermen, cannery workers and other individuals affected by the spill, said Exxon spokesman James Robertson in Anchorage.
In addition, the state of Alaska has asked Exxon to reimburse it for about $34.5 million in costs; so far, Exxon has paid the state $7.4 million in cash and has agreed to pay bills amounting to $23 million more, said the state's Oil Spill Coordinating Office.
Exxon must also reimburse the U.S. Coast Guard and other federal agencies.
Meanwhile, Exxon confirmed Wednesday that it would shut down its Denver exploration and production office, which employs about 105 people.
The office's operations will be transferred to Midland, Tex.
