Yesterday, under artillery firefrom the federal army, they waved a white flag andsurrendered as Yugoslavia lurched closer to civil war.
Less than two days after Slovenia and Croatia, two ofYugoslavia's six republics, unilaterally seceded from thenation, the federal government in Belgrade mobilized troopsto regain control.
Local militiamen shot down a federalarmy helicopter as it flew over the capital, killing thepilot and co-pilot, the Associated Press reported.
To put it briefly, Slovenia is at war," he said.
Reuters news service reported from Ljubljana thatthousands of local defense forces were patrolling withautomatic weapons.
Outside the Slovene capital, governmentarmored vehicles smashed through barricades and road blocks,leaving a trail of twisted metal, flattened cars andshattered glass.
In Croatia, the army moved into areas where fightingerupted between Croats and minority Serbs, Yugoslavia's twolargest nationalities and historic rivals.
Meanwhile, tanks and artillery woundup the narrow mountain pass.
In midafternoon, the customshouse was rattled with a burst of rifle fire and a fewminutes later it was rocked by three projectiles fromanti-tank guns.
Here, the drama was watched by several Yugoslavstrying to return to their country from Austria; the cooks,waitresses and a few guests at restaurants on both sides ofthe border; several tourists who were caught on the Yugoslavside; and a dozen Austrian customs officers and policemen.
Slovenes watching the action were horrified, as theconsequences of their independence grab became clear.
"Yesterday we had a big party, and today we're fighting,"moaned Bogataj Vejko, a truck driver from near Ljubljana, whohad safely crossed the border early in the morning and wasnow trying to get back home.
After the shooting stopped, he talked to a group ofthe federal soldiers, and discovered that some wereconscripts from Slovenia. "
"After the army established control, Milan Jelen, a Slovenebusinessman, reached into the backseat of his car andretrieved his son's toy slingshot. "
The first shots that have been fired inSlovenia since after World War II," he said.
"In Ljubljana, Milan Kucan, Slovenia's president, vowed ina television address that the republic's militia wouldrespond with "all methods" to any aggression against his"independent state."
In Croatia,officials also vowed to defend their sovereignty.
But the poorly trained and equipped Slovene and Croatianmilitias, formed in the past several months, are no match forthe 180,000-strong federal army.
The local militias also havenothing to counter the central government's several thousandtanks and other armored vehicles, not to mention thegovernment's air forces.
So far, no foreigncountries have recognized Slovenian and Croatianindependence.
have lobbied heavily for the maintainance of theYugoslav state, and have threatened to withhold millions ofdollars in aid if the country breaks up.
But U.S. Secretary of State James Baker appealed toBelgrade to find a way for Croatia and Slovenia to expresstheir "national aspirations" through "negotiations anddialogue" rather than bloodshed.
Mr. Baker and White Housespokesman Marlin Fitzwater had suggested to reportersWednesday that the breakaway republics be granted greaterautonomy and sovereignty within a united Yugoslavia.
In a letter to Slovenia's premier, Gen. KonradKolsek of the federal military district that controlsSlovenia said he had orders to seize all border crossings andwould "crush" any resistence.
TheCommunist leadership of Serbia, Yugoslavia's largestrepublic, insists on strong central control from Belgrade,the capital of both Serbia and Yugoslavia.
Serbian attempts to deny Croatia and Slovenia theirindependence are motivated by two fears.
On theother hand, Slovenia and Croatia say they could no longertolerate the erosion of their finances by theSerbian-dominated bureaucracy.
Together, Slovenia, with two million people, and Croatia,with five million, supply nearly two-thirds of Yugoslavia'sforeign exchange and about half of the country's grossnational product.
