The action came on a voice vote, despite arguments from the Bush Administration and other opponents that it is both unconstitutional and unworkable.
Even if the prohibition survives, Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher has said that he would ask President Bush to veto any bill that comes to his desk with such a provision.
At stake are the number of seats in Congress for California, Florida, New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania and other states that will be reapportioned on the basis of next year's census.
Federal aid to states also is frequently based on population counts, so millions of dollars in grants and other funds made available on a per capita basis would be affected.
"The bottom line is illegal aliens ought to be deported, not counted," Cochran said.
"There are enormous additional costs for states who have had a surge of population," Wilson said, adding that those states should receive additional federal aid to cope with the added problems.
Opponents of a ban on counting illegal aliens said that a ban is impractical because the Census Bureau already has printed questionnaires that do not contain any question about legality of residence.
For 190 years, said Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-N.Y.), the federal government has counted all inhabitants without regard to citizenship in accordance with the Constitution's provisions.
The Senate's action was sharply criticized by Undersecretary of Commerce Michael Darby, but he voiced hope that it would be reversed by a Senate-House conference.
"There really is a widespread realization that this would not only be unconstitutional but literally impossible," Darby said.
But he added that he is "optimistic, cautiously optimistic," that House conferees would resist the Senate-approved ban and not force Bush to veto the legislation.
"It is going to have a dramatic and disastrous impact in the Hispanic community," Moreno said.
"Our position is that we count everybody at their place of residence," said bureau spokesman James Gorman.
