Gusty winds spread a third Wyoming fire over 400 acres of theBridger-Teton National Forest and forced the evacuation of acampground and summer cabins on Freemont Lake, a half mile from theblaze.
Hundreds of small grass and brush fires were reported over theJuly 4 weekend, some caused by fireworks, in various parts of thecountry.
``The Fourth of July holiday really contributed to theproblem,'' said Capt.
Last nightit sounded like every fire alarm in the area was going off.''
In California, a fireworks-caused blaze that swept over 2,200acres near Yosemite National Park was declared contained at dawnTuesday.
By Monday, $384,000 had been spent to combat the fire, she said.
Authorities will try to recover that money, said Pat Kaunert of theU.S.
More than 670 firefighters from federal, state and localagencies cut trails in the rugged terrain by hand and usedairplanes to drop fire retardant, officials said.
But Dwight Barnett, a spokesman for the Tennessee Division ofForestry, said there were 26 wildland fires on the Fourth of July,which burned just 113 acres.
``We were very relieved to get through the weekend in such goodshape,'' he said, citing partly the care taken by people playingwith fireworks.
In Utah, Chief Ranger Bob Andrew said the Zion blaze was ignitedby lightning June 19.
Weekend rain helpedkeep it from spreading outside the wilderness boundary, said fireinformation Officer Jo Barnier in Billings.
And a helicopter wasdropping water on the fire Tuesday afternoon.
Phil Jaquith, Beartooth District ranger for theforest, said Forest Service policy is to allow wilderness fires toburn unless they threaten trails or structures or are about tospread outside the wilderness boundary.
The evacuation in the Bridger-Teton forest was a precaution andthe fire started to die down somewhat as temperatures dropped atnighttime, forest spokesman Fred Kingwill said.
In Michigan, authorities concluded a hot exhaust pipe or exhaustparticles triggered the Upper Peninsula fire, said Mary Mumford,spokeswoman for Hiawatha National Forest.
Firefighters also battled two smaller fires that broke out onthe Upper Peninsula Tuesday, burning 220 acres, Department ofNatural Resources spokesman Bob Heyd said.
Rising humidity and cooler temperatures were checking the fire'sspread, he said.
There were no injuries in the fire, which wasreported Tuesday afternoon.
