Carbon particles indicatethe exhaust of a passing truck was the culprit.
And there are otherways to tell a fire was accidental.
He comes down to arson in most of his investigations _ and heand other forest officials believe the problem is often rooted insome regional traditions that are as hard to quell as flames.
A psychologist's study found economic and even aesthetic reasonswhy some people light woods aflame.
Arsonists set 172 of the 296 Mark Twain fires that have brokenout so far this year, burning more than 9,000 acres, Smallwoodsaid.
A total of 14,200 acres of the forest, which covers 1.5million acres mostly in southern Missouri, were burned during aspring fire season made more volatile by drought.
On average, Smallwood estimates, 70 percent of the forest fireseach year in Missouri are deliberately set.
``It's probably 90 percent higher than the national average,''said Ron McDonald, Mark Twain's fire control officer.
He said MarkTwain consistently is among the five forest districts with theworst arson problem.
``It's just been an Ozark tradition of incendiary (deliberatelyset) fires,'' McDonald said.
Fires in other areas are morelikely to be caused by lightning or man's carelessness.
His military-neat office at the Forest Service headquarters inRolla is decorated with game bird feathers, a picture of SmokeyBear and a glass-doored bookcase lined with reports and text books.
The Forest Service has called on psychologists, sociologists andarchaeologists to determine why fires are set.
A policy of open grazing, with cattle free to feed on anyunfenced land, was allowed in the Ozarks until the 1960s, longerthan in other wooded areas, Smallwood said.
Subsistence farmers in the rural South who were interviewed byShea and his researchers claimed fire helped control ticks, snakesand disease and controlled the encroachment of trees on land wherethey wanted to graze cattle.
``Their ways are those of frontiersmen living in an arrestedfrontier,'' Shea wrote.
Aesthetics even played a part: Shea and other researchers foundthat people living in areas where arson was common enjoyed thesmell of smoke in the spring air, and believed the woods lookedbetter ``burned clean.''
``We had one case (in 1984) where two men went to Sunday schooland after school they started a fire with their Sunday schoolliterature,'' Smallwood said.
``Part of the problem is people driving around drinking andshooting road signs,'' Smallwood said.
``Sometimes you hear that someone is angry at the Forest Servicebecause of some administrative action _ because we closed a road ordisallowed something.
And they don't necessarily have to be mad atthe Forest Service.
``It just costs a lot of moneyto put these fires out and it's coming right out of our taxdollars.''
Last year,a judge ordered two arsonists to work weekends for the ForestService.
``An arson case in the forest is very hard to make,'' he said.``When you go out in the middle of the forest to a blackened areato begin an investigation, it's very difficult and frustrating.
He noted that in some cases, people who have evidence withholdit for fear of being burned out themselves.
Beyond the cost in dollars of forest fires, there's risk tothose who fight them.
And I would have also liked to have known if the prosecutor wouldhave considered a manslaughter charge against the arsonist.
