Introduction: Here, at a glance, are developments today involving the crash ofPan American World Airways Flight 103 Wednesday night in Lockerbie,Scotland, that killed all 259 people aboard and more than 20 peopleon the ground: The jumbo jet, a Boeing 747, apparently exploded in the airbefore crashing and investigators focused on terrorist threats toplace a bomb on a Pan Am airliner.
The only possible cause immediately ruled out was acollision with another aircraft.
Searchers recovered both the airplane's flight recorders.
Twenty-two people were killed on the ground, most of them in carshits by wreckage, authorities said.
David Kyd, chief public relations officer, said ``it would seemto us that the most likely hypothesis is an explosion aboard,'' andthat structural problems were unlikely to have been involved in thecrash because of the sudden loss of contact with the plane.
The 747has a reputation for ruggedness and is able to stay aloft even withserious damage to the structure.
The State Department warned U.S. embassies that a bomb threat hadbeen made against Pan Am jetliners flying from Frankfurt to theUnited States 2{ weeks ago and the Federal Aviation Administrationtold Pan Am this month that the airline might be the target of aterrorist bombing.
An anonymous caller to the AP office in London claimedresponsibility for the crash and said it was in retaliation for thedowning of an Iran Air Airbus by the U.S. Navy cruiser Vincennes inJuly.
We are very proud,'' the male caller said, then hung up quickly.
A senior official of the Palestine Liberation Organization saidit was ``nonsensical'' to link Palestinians to the crash.
``It cannot possibly occur to the Palestinians or the Arabs tocommit such an act,'' Mahmoud Abbas, code-named Abu-Mazen, toldreporters when asked about reports that the plane may have beendowned by sabotage.
The jumbo jet that crashed had at least 24 mechanical problemsduring the past eight years, including cracks, severe corrosion andan on-board fire, according to FAA service records.
FAA spokeswoman JoAnn Sloane said there have been problems withminor cracks in 747s over the past few years, but inspections didnot find much cracking.
