The AmericanLung Association estimates that 20,000 Americans a year develop TB.
In parts of Africa, where AIDS is already a health risk,tuberculosis has become epidemic, said Dr. Annik Rouillon,executive director of the International Union Against Tuberculosisand Lung Disease in Paris.
Snider stressed that tuberculosis, unlike AIDS, is a curabledisease and called for TB screenings at drug rehabilitationprograms, prisons or other places where AIDS tests are beingadministered.
Snider also said doctors should administer TB tests to allpersons testing positive for the HIV virus since TB may not bereadily diagnosed in AIDS patients.
``It's important we get control of the situation,'' he said.
In Wyoming, the Centers for Disease Control recorded no newcases of TB in 1989, demonstrating that it is a condition that canbe controlled and cured, according to Dr. Lee B. Reichman, directorof the pulmonary division of the University of Medicine andDentistry in New Jersey.
Moreover, unlike AIDS, TB is a highly contagious disease thatcan be spread by airborne particles coughed up by a person withuntreated, clinically active pulmonary TB.
Untreated, tuberculosiskills about 50 percent of its victims within two years, accordingto the Centers for Disease Control.
However, he noted that therehad been an increase in positive TB tests among AIDS health workers.
Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium that commonly affects thelungs but can attack almost any organ.
For the last three decades,it has been preventable and curable through multiple drug therapy,Snider said.
``TB is long known as an opportunistic organism,'' Hopewell said.
The doctors said U.S. minority groups have become increasingsusceptible to TB.
Reichman noted that most American have forgotten about theproblems of TB; from 1981 to 1984, TB cases declined an average of6 percent per year according to the Centers for disease control.
TBvictims include Henry David Thoreau, Washington Irving, FranzKafka, Ring Lardner, Somerset Maugham and Vivien Leigh.
An estimated 3 million persons a year die worldwide from TB,according to the American Lung Association.
