``I got nothing to hide,'' Johnson told The Boston Globe duringthe flight to New York, where he then boarded another plane forCanada.
``I don't want to tell no names, but somebody's smilingtoday.''
``It's not the only thing in life to win a gold medal,'' Johnsonsaid.
Stripped of the gold and banned for life from Canadian teams,Johnson cried in the back of a limousine that whisked him to hismother's home in suburban Toronto after the grueling trip fromSeoul.
``If he had come home with the gold in tact, there would havebeen a million people here,'' Plaxton said.
Johnson, surrounded by a phalanx of security guards, ducked intoa car and made a mad dash for the door when he arrived at thehouse.
Johnson spent the 1 hour, 40 minute flight from New York in theplane's cockpit to avoid reporters.
As passengers realized who he was, some sought autographs.
Agroup of flight attendants swarmed around Johnson for a photo.
In Canada, a parade in his adopted hometown was canceled, andpromoters backed out of deals or announced their ties with thesprinter would expire quietly.
Sports Minister Jean Charest said Johnson had tested negativefor drugs in August and had passed eight tests in two years.
Johnson's family and close friends also denied he took steroids   `` I know my son doesn't take drugs.
Iknow it,'' said his father, Ben Johnson Sr., from Falmouth,Jamaica, in an interview with the Toronto Globe and Mail.
``Ben loved mom too much to discredit her in any way,'' said hissister, Claire Rodney, of suburban Toronto.
It was surrendered to Canadian Olympic officialsbefore the family left South Korea on Monday.
``Right now he's just relieved to be resting at home.
He wantsto be with people who love him now, not the hypocrites whoabandoned him,'' Ms. Rodney said outside her mother's house.
Being at home is the best medicine for him,''said Ms. Rodney.
His personal physician, Dr. George Astaphan, also said nosteroids were dispensed.
``I never gave him any, and he never told me he took any,''Astaphan said in an interview in a baggage claim area.
Police escorted a woman to the door of Johnson's mother's homeso she could deliver a card with more than 1,000 signatures fromCanadians ``who sympathized with your personal devastation.''
``The last flicker of hope just died,'' said Danny Planetta, whowas watching TV at a bar when he heard Monday night that Johnsonhad tested positive for steroids.
