While little can be done to control the natural fires that occur in chaparral country, homeowners can change their approach to landscaping and help improve the chances of their homes and property surviving a brush fire.
"The idea behind fire-resistant landscaping -- firescaping -- is to design landscaping to minimize the fire hazard," says Owen Dell, a Santa Barbara landscape contractor who has many canyon and hillside homeowners as clients.
The garden is a model of how to design and maintain landscaping around the home to provide a line of defense against fire.
Zone 4, farthest from the house, consists of native vegetation that has been thinned to reduce the amount of fuel that could feed a fire.
Native chaparral flora, including oaks, ceanothus and manzanita, are found here.
Zone 3 includes plants selected for their low profile and slow-burning characteristics.
Wildflowers such as Pacific Coast iris, monkeyflower and California poppies add a splash of color to this zone.
It's designed to be a greenbelt zone of maximum fire protection.
Jade, aloe vera, phormium and evergreen currant are among the high-moisture-content plants characteristic of this zone.
Cactus, tobira and shiny leaf jasmine are examples of fire-resistant plants that still have a high aesthetic appeal.
"If one of those lights up near your house, there's no way to save it.
One popular plant found almost everywhere in Southern California -- ice plant -- would seem to be an ideal choice for a firescape garden.
The plant produces a great deal of litter beneath that succulent surface and can smolder for days.
Two other surprisingly flammable flora are redwood trees and bougainvillea.
Suddenly, xeriscaping -- landscaping with drought-tolerant natives -- is becoming commonplace and fashionable.
As Dell sees it, while many home gardeners have learned to deal with low-water conditions, they've virtually ignored another common Southern California occurrence -- wildfire.
Just as appropriate landscaping can help gardeners with water shortages, so may careful landscaping help reduce the risk of significant property damage in the most fire-prone areas.
The Firescapes Demonstration Garden is located across the street from City Fire Station 7 at 2411 Stanwood Drive and is open every day from 8 a.m. until sunset.
A brochure available at the garden aids your exploration.
For additional information, contact the Santa Barbara City Fire Department public education coordinator at (805) 564-5703.
Bear right (north) on Sycamore Canyon Road (144) to Stanwood Drive (192).
There's ample parking at the station, which is located on the corner of Stanwood Drive and Mission Ridge Road.
