Introduction: Wearing a bright yellow flame-retardant shirt, Donald Despain crouches down to study the ash-covered forest floor.
The firestorm that raged through here in recent weeks was driven by 60-mile-an-hour winds that fanned temperatures to more than 1,600 degrees Fahrenheit.
The fire was so intense that a gray shadow on the forest floor is all that remains of a fallen log.
As Yellowstone National Park's research biologist, he has already begun to monitor the forest's rebirth from the worst fire on record.
"This is amazing," says Mr. Despain, reflecting on his count.
"This works out to one million seeds an acre."
Only about 500 mature trees were on an acre of hillside here before the fire.
Of course, not all the seeds will become trees.
Grasses and several types of wildflowers, ranging from fireweed to wild geraniums, are already sprouting less than seven weeks after fire roared past Grant Village near Yellowstone Lake.
Mr. Despain's research should play a major role in a new debate over whether to reforest burnt areas of Yellowstone or to let nature take its course.
The National Park Service has already been at the center of a much-publicized political firestorm over its 16-year-old "natural burn" policy, which allows lightning-caused fires to burn themselves out, except where they threaten towns or park buildings.
Reforestation would give wooded areas in Yellowstone a "five-year jump" on natural regrowth of the woods and would "get it green again," says John Davis, Willamette Industries Inc.'s general manager for Western timber logging operations in Lewiston, Idaho.
Gerald M. Freeman, the president and chief operating officer of Stone Forest Industries Inc., agrees: "Controlled burning, selective logging and reforestation are a much better way to manage the forests."
The pressure to bring back Yellowstone's forest through reforestation may get intense.
In August, with fires out of control, the tourist trade was off 30% here.
New Jersey's governor, Thomas Kean, for instance, announced that his state planned to donate thousands of evergreen seedlings to replant Yellowstone, apparently without realizing that none of the proffered species are indigenous to the park.
Mr. Despain hopes that the scientific evidence that park researchers are gathering will testify to the forest's ability to renew itself, while countering emotional calls for human help.
"When I hear the word 're-vegetation,' my blood runs cold," he says.
He worked under Glen Cole, the park's head of research from 1968 to 1976 and a leading advocate of letting natural processes prevail in the park.
Alston Chase, an author and park critic, describes Mr. Despain as one of the park's "most orthodox believers" in the official natural management policy.
Mr. Despain has set up or is planning several long-term research projects to study the effects of this year's fires.
(He had to abandon one such study area two weeks ago.
Fire licked at its corners even as he was mapping the trees within.)
After the fire is out, he surveys damage to a plot.
Some of the impulse to reforest Yellowstone may be based on a misapprehension of just how much damage has been done here.
Television pictures of the Yellowstone's fires at their height made things look worse than they are.
Yet only 10% to 15% of land within these boundaries was scorched by raging crown fires that burn everything in sight, Mr. Varley estimates.
Driving along the 140 miles of the park's upper and lower scenic loop -- on roads open to park visitors -- one sees a Yellowstone that is a patchwork of green, brown and blackened forest and meadow.
The slow-growing trees, only seven to 10 inches in diameter, were relatively young by Yellowstone standards.
Most of the lodgepole stands here that burned this summer were 250 to 400 years old.
Mr. Despain says it is no coincidence that most burnt trees here were senior citizens, relatively speaking, and highly susceptible to fire.
As lodgepoles age, they lose some of their natural resistance to disease and insects.
Dead trees fall to the forest floor, joined by others blown over by the strong winds howling down from surrounding peaks.
Grasses and shrubs, some of their seeds having lain dormant for 100 years or more, fill in the open spaces between the trees.
"Most plant species have adopted one means or another to ensure their survival."
Mr. Despain takes a Swiss army knife from his pocket and digs into the forest floor.
Seeds that have been dormant for decades beneath the soil appear to be triggered by the passing fire, he says, and will germinate next spring.
Meanwhile, nutrients that were bound up in the cells of mature pines for hundreds of years have been returned in the form of ash to the soil as fertilizer for next year's growth.
For the first five years after a fire, while surrounding vegetation is still relatively low, there will be a proliferation of wildflowers in the park, she says.
In addition to fireweed and wild geraniums, lupen, yarrow, mountain dandelion and arnica have already been spotted this year among the ashes.
Aspen trees, whose paper-white bark and yellow leaves punctuate the evergreen forests this time of year, also thrive after a fire.
With their roots undamaged by the flames, aspen trees return to their juvenile phase for three to four years, and will add as much as four feet in a 90-day growing season.
By next July, one will find it difficult to tell which meadows burned in 1988.
Forests visited only by ground fires will rebound almost as quickly.
Shrubs and grasses cover what is left of the burnt undergrowth, although fire scars will be visible on some trees for years.
The completely burned forests will remain a mixture of meadow and snags for several years.
Hundreds of plant species proliferate after a fire until "canopy closure" is achieved in about 40 years.
At that point, the pines -- still less than 15 feet tall -- begin to choke off light reaching the forest floor as their limbs grow together.
As lodgepoles come to dominate the ecosystem, other plant species decline in number, reaching a low of no more than a dozen in the mature forest.
Then the forest thins as it ages, trees fall, underbrush grows, and the forest is primed for a fire to start its life cycle over again.
It's too early to tell whether the fires, which burned some lower pastures, affected the herds' ability to weather Yellowstone's long winter.
More winterkill among the herds might be expected this year in any case, since animal populations are now near their historical upper limits.
Ecologically, there's no down side to the fire," he adds, conceding that similar statements by park officials may have sounded cavalier when the fires were raging.
They certainly did seem that way to some people.
So far, Mr. Mott, who didn't return calls for comment, doesn't appear in danger of losing his job, park service officials say.
But Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel says he favors certain, unspecified changes in the natural-burn policy.
A panel of academics and scientists is being assembled to study this year's fires and make recommendations on what changes might be in order.
and perhaps to see how nature is restoring the forest.
