While short-term measures may ease the immediate budgetary pressures, morefundamental reforms will be needed if the welfare state is not to underminethe economic performance that has underpinned its enormous expansion sincethe second world war.
Reform of national welfare systems to bring costs under control is now onthe political agenda throughout the OECD, as countries struggle to rein ingovernment spending.
Thebiggest element in this growth has been the cost of pensions, healthcare,unemployment benefits and family support.
Expenditure has risen rapidly in recent decades,more than doubling its average share of GDP in OECD countries since 1960.Pensions typically account for about a quarter of the increase in publicexpenditure over this period.
Improvements in pension benefits, such as automatic increases to matchrising earnings.
Countries such as Spain, Irelandand the Netherlands have been extending their public healthcare systems toprovide universal coverage.
As with pensions, health systems have become more generous in the wake ofeconomic growth - for example, including grafts and transplants that werepreviously regarded as experimental.
But it has also helped to push up the budget for sickness and invaliditybenefits, which often offer an escape route into early retirement for olderworkers.
For example, governments have become much lesswilling to offer improvements in pensions.
Moves are afoot in countries suchas Germany and Italy to raise the pension age.
Automatic indexation ofpensions to earnings has been weakened in Germany and ended altogether inthe UK for the basic flat-rate pension.
Healthcare systems have been reformed to make them more efficient and tobear down on the cost of pharmaceuticals.
Although there are considerabledifferences between national health systems, healthcare reforms in countriessuch as the UK and the Netherlands are increasingly converging on modelsthat use competition and price incentives to control costs.
Many countries have also begun to tighten up on unemployment benefits, withreductions in benefit levels and more rigorous conditions to qualify.
Activelabour market policies have been introduced to promote a return toemployment.
Some countries have succeeded in stabilising their welfare costs by measuressuch as these.
But what most concerns those responsible for public financesis the strength of underlying pressures on welfare spending that will pushcosts upwards in the future.
Increases in life expectancy havealready increased the number of elderly people collecting pensions.
For the OECD as a whole,the age dependency ratio is predicted to rise from about 19 per cent in 1990to 28 per cent by 2020 and 37 per cent by 2040.Some countries face much greater pressures from the ageing of theirpopulations than others.
Germany and Japan, for example, will both have agedependency ratios of 34 per cent by 2020 - one person over the age of 65 forevery three people between 15 and 64.
By 2040, almost half of Germany'spopulation could be over 65, though the proportion will fall thereafter.
Age dependency ratios will climb more slowly in the UK and US, to about 25per cent in 2020 - four people of working age to support every elderlyperson.
In both countries, ratios will peak at about 33 per cent in 2040.The most immediate impact of these demographic changes will be on pensions,where costs will in any case rise as pension schemes continue to mature.
Real economic growth rates of up to 1.5 per cent a year wouldbe needed to pay for pensions alone - and that on the assumption that thepensions do not increase in real terms.
The growing gap between pensioners andthose still at work that would result could be politically unacceptable.
However, raising pensions by more than prices would either require muchhigher growth rates or higher taxes for those in work to pay the bill.
The impact of an ageing population on healthcare costs is less clear-cut.
Experts differ on whether increased longevity inevitably means more medicalcare: while more might be required for the very elderly, less might beneeded for younger people as chronic diseases become less common.
Additional costs of new drugs and advances in medical technology could be atleast as important as demography in pushing up healthcare bills.
This will be encouraged by social changes, such asthe decline of the extended family in which older people were cared for byyounger relatives.
Other changes in social structure are also pushing up the demands on thewelfare state.
This ratchet effect has worried the Group of Seven leading industrialcountries sufficiently for an employment summit to be hosted by PresidentClinton in the coming months.
Continuing rises in the base level ofunemployment would further undermine countries' ability to pay for theirwelfare states.
However, the scope for such increases is limited by voters' reluctance topay higher taxes.
Where the cost of welfare is jointly funded by employers -as in Germany - higher contributions are also increasingly resisted bybusiness, which fears the consequences for international competitiveness ofhigher costs.
In a global economy, no country can long afford to burdenbusiness with higher welfare costs than its neighbours.
But that would also have deleteriouseffects, according to the OECD.
Average government debt in OECD countrieshas risen from 23 per cent of GDP in 1979 to 44 per cent in 1992.Without either tax rises or cuts in welfare budgets, current welfarespending plans could increase debt ratios on average by 90 percentage pointsover the next 40 years, according to one OECD study.
It says this is 'asituation which most would think unsustainable'.This is why the OECD's half-yearly Economic Outlook repeatedly stresses theimportance of controlling welfare spending in improving economicperformance.
The OECD's immediate priorities for reform include charges forthe use of some welfare services and greater competition to increase theefficiency of those services.
Tackling these longer-term pressures will require more than tinkering withcharges and efficiency drives in welfare services.
Significant cuts in benefit levels, for example, may be needed - includinggreater targeting of benefits on the most needy.
From providing support 'from the cradle to the grave', itwould become a safety net for those who could not afford to provide forthemselves.
Yet it is increasingly clear that there is no alternative to fundamentalreforms if advanced economies are to protect their most vulnerable citizenswithout imposing unacceptable burdens on economic performance.
But a new glue will beneeded over the next 50 years if advanced economies are to pass beyond thewelfare state.
