Introduction:There is a recurring temptation in American politics to wreak vengeance on one's adversaries by overhauling the political institutions that they dominate.
The Republicans in 1951 wanted to ensure that there would never be another F.D.R., so they pushed through the 22nd Amendment limiting presidents to two terms.
The first cut took place on Sept. 18, when Oklahoma voters endorsed overwhelmingly a ballot initiative limiting state lawmakers to 12 years' service.
It is, rather, the kind of minor political tempest that gets highlighted briefly by the media, is copied in a few places and then disappears.
Where state legislators are underpaid, have no professional staffs and meet rarely, they usually come under the sway of full-time governors, executive-branch bureaucrats and highly paid lobbyists.
By turning out the legislators every 12 years -- or even worse, every six years -- you pretty much guarantee that those who are elected won't have much of a stake in their jobs.
They will use them as temporary hitching posts on their way to other offices without term limitations.
Not every state lawmaker has his eye on a seat in the U.S. Senate or House of Representatives.
But it's a safe bet that more people will be using state seats to groom for higher office if they know that the law will force them out soon.
Their influence over these legislative birds of passage will grow because they will be guaranteed a perennial crop of callow and ignorant lawmakers.
One thing that legislators now have going for them is that they can become conversant with public issues and so challenge, if they care to, the self-serving propaganda of the special interests.
These unelected officials are permanent and beyond the reach of voters, while the very people who are in some measure accountable will be hustled out of office.
Ultimately, what the term limit amounts to is an indictment of citizenship.
It is an admission that the voters are civic imbeciles who cannot discriminate between bad lawmakers and good ones.
At the most basic level, term limitation is just flat-out wrongheaded and illogical: To throw everybody out when all you want to do is throw out the rascals is like burning down your house in order to get rid of the rats.
