Introduction: A stone's throw from the smelly Smithfield meatmarket is an office building complex with no sign or anything toattract the attention of Londoners hurrying by.
Mounted cameras, jumpy guards and heavy doors keep out theuninvited.
Its experts sort mounds ofrough diamonds constituting 80 percent of the world's annualproduction.
Sales have declined sharply, and the 56-year-old cartel isfacing pressure to give producers better terms and allow them tosell more of their own gems.
De Beers' South African interests face an uncertain future,largely because of a newly energized political will by the blackmajority in that country, an important diamond producer.
TheAfrican National Congress has pledged to nationalize South Africa'smajor sources of wealth if it takes power.
Apparently attempting to limit risk, De Beers recently announcedit would split South African and foreign interests into twopublicly held companies, one based in Switzerland.
The decline has limited De Beers' scope for raising prices.
The government of newly independent Namibia, meanwhile, isexpected to demand a one-fifth stake in Consolidated Diamond Mines,De Beers' Namibian subsidiary.
Jack Lunzer, managing director of IDC Ltd., an independentdiamond distributor in London, said De Beers undoubtedly willcontinue to control the major part of world production, but itsmarketing arm's profits will fall.
The effect hasn't been felt yet; De Beers' profit rose 37percent to $1.1 billion in 1989.
Few diamond-producing countries dare sell their output outsidethe organization, and some bold enough to leave have returnedbecause of the difficulty in peddling diamonds alone.
``We are as strongly in control of the diamond market as we havebeen for many years,'' said Tim Capon, the cartel's director.
The organization buys rough diamonds from De Beers' own mines,which represent 30 percent of world production, and from producersin Tanzania, South Africa, Zaire, Botswana, Namibia, Australia andthe Soviet Union.
It was robbed once, inthe early 1980s, when some diamonds were snatched as courierscarried them from one building to another.
De Beers picks its 160 or so buying customers from thousands ofhopefuls.
Last year, it spent $160 million onadvertising and promotion, trying, for example, to boost purchasesof men's diamond jewelry.
De Beers's achievement over the decades has been to mass-marketwhat was once an aristocratic luxury without greatly diminishingits value.
De Beers insists it seeks long-term stability and prosperity forthe industry, saying price fluctuations would undermine confidencein the value of diamonds.
While other commodities markets havesuffered repeated convulsions, rough diamond prices haven't fallensince the organization started announcing price changes in 1964.
Even its fiercest competitors laud De Beers for putting upconsiderable amounts of money and assuming the risks to developmines and support the market.
But producers criticize the organization's secretiveness andwhat they call its arbitrary valuation system.
Some want more ofthe industry's millions of jobs relocated in their own countries.
Said Lunzer: `` It's not unnatural for people in the producingcountries to say, `Are we getting a proper share of the value ofour national resource?'''
After reviewing a complaint filed by theBritish mining company Consolidated Gold Fields PLC alleginganti-competitive practices, Britain's Office of Fair Tradingdecided in August against formally investigating whether theorganization abuses its monopoly.
Formally known as De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., and based inKimberley, South Africa, the company was formed in 1888 by theBritish industrial colonialist Cecil Rhodes.
Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, a diamond merchant, became chairman ofDe Beers in 1929 and five years later formed Diamond Trading Co.,the precursor of today's cartel.
Now 81, Oppenheimer still serves on De Beers' board ofdirectors, of which he previously was chairman.
His 44-year-old sonand heir apparent, Nicholas, is deputy to Chairman Julian OgilvieThompson.
