Introduction: The calm waters of Prince William Soundhave stymied efforts to disperse the largest oil spill in U.S.history, which spewed from a ship that ran aground trying to avoidchunks of ice, officials said.
Coast Guard spokesman Ed Wieliczkiewicz said the use ofchemicals to disperse and sink the heavy North Slope crude oilfailed because the agents depend in part on rough seas to break upthe oil.
Early Friday the Exxon Valdez was losing 20,000 gallons of oilper hour, but the flow slowed to a trickle later.
``This is the largest oil spill in U.S. history and itunfortunately took place in an enclosed water body with numerousislands, channels, bays and fiords,'' said Richard Golob, publisherof the Golob Oil Pollution Bulletin.
Hesaid the vessel steered from its course to avoid chunks of ice anddid not return to its normal traffic lane.
Divers were to check the ship's hull and their findings were tobe used in making plans for the removal of crude oil still aboardthe vessel.
In Washington, Interior Department spokesman Steve Goldsteinsaid efforts had begun to evacuate waterfowl, sea otters and otherwildlife from the danger area.
The Exxon Valdez had loaded 1.2 million barrels of oil at theAlyeska Pipeline Service Co. marine terminal at Valdez and was enroute to Long Beach, Calif., when it crunched onto the reef.
Theship marks the second aniversary of its maiden voyage today.
It relies on the fishing, oil and tourism industries.
The soundis considered a playground for kayakers, sport fishermen andtourists.
Jason Wells, executive director of the Valdez FisheriesDevelopment Association, said he believed the oil slick would causelittle damage unless wind pushes it back toward Valdez.
Wells said the black cod fishery is scheduled to begin April 1,but the region's major herring fishery is not expected to get underway until mid-April.
``It's of concern for two reasons: one is the size of the spilland that this is such a sensitive, very productive area,'' saidLisa Speer, senior staff scientist with the Natural ResourcesDefense Council in New York.
Valdez City Manager Doug Griffin said the 800-mile trans-Alaskapipeline which carries oil from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez and themarine terminal have an enviable environmental record.
But he added:   ``Living in Valdez, we've always worried that sometime somethinglike this could happen.''
The largest tanker spill in history was in the July 19, 1979,collision off Tobago of the supertankers Atlantic Empress andAegean Captain, in which 300,000 tons _ more than 80 milliongallons _ of oil was lost.
