Moredisaster relief aid went there than to any other state.
Carl Grindberg survived the drought witha $45,000 dose of federal aid.
But for this farmer and others, itwas a give-and-take bailout: Take the money with one hand, give itaway with the other.
``The guy who sold me $5,000 of fuel, he got paid,'' Grindbergsaid.
``It's what carried us through in 1988,'' said Cass Countyextension agent Duane Hauck.
``If it hadn't been for drought aid,the economic situation all through North Dakota would have beendisastrous.
It was the major source of income for most farmers.''
``I don't think too many farmers took disaster aid and boughtCadillacs and went on vacation in my area,'' Grindberg added.
A study of the $3.9 billion disaster relief program, conductedby The Associated Press over seven months, found that outside theMidwest drought area, lax rules and requirements led to thousandsof farmers collecting millions of dollars for nothing more seriousthan the normal trials of nature.
But money did reach areas Congress most intended to aid,including North Dakota, where it kept some farmers on their landand may have prevented some business closures.
``You might say it kept the state alive,'' said Fred Selberg,another farmer in this Red River Valley county.
North Dakota, where the drought evoked memories of Dust Bowldays with tumbleweed dancing along the barren horizon, received themost disaster dollars.
More than 49,000 producers shared $410.2million _ about 10.5 percent of the total package.
But droughtaid cut farmers' losses from $1.1 billion to $706 million, a NorthDakota State University study found.
Each farm dollar triples as it travels down Main Street into theeconomy.
Another university survey of 466 farmers said that withoutdrought aid, the average farmer's net cash income would have beenjust $6,300.
Disaster aid and crop insurance also were critical to otherdrought-ravaged states, including Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota andWisconsin.
The five states together received nearly half theassistance allocated nationwide.
Disaster aid and crop insurance pumped about $500 million intoIowa's economy, an Iowa State University study said.
``There was no question it was needed to stave off a major newwave of bankruptcies and financial problems among Corn Beltproducers,'' said Mark Edelman, a university economist.
``Even the drought assistance for most farmers fell well shortof bringing what their income would be with normal yields, but itprovided a safety net,'' he said.
``From '81 through '86, the bottom pretty much fell out ofeverything,'' said Greg Schulz, who farms about five miles fromGrindberg.
The last thing North Dakota needed is morenegatives to push us down.''
Despite relief and nearly $200 million in crop insurance, thestate still needs ``a good year to get back on our feet,'' Haucksaid.
Two reasons why: more acres of wheat wereplanted this year, and farmers don't have grain reserves to sell athigh prices as they did in 1988 to ease their burden.
And while virtually all farmers herereceived government aid in 1988, far fewer will be eligible asecond time.
For Larry Richard, a 36-year-old father of three who farms 1,000acres near the town of Horace, $39,000 in aid, even coupled with$55,000 in crop insurance, amounted to ``just enough to break even.
If that seems like a lot, Richard, who grows wheat, soybeans andbarley, notes it costs him $150,000 for rent, interest, seed,fertilizer, equipment and other necessities.
``Our investment in farming is tremendouscompared to the average businessman.
Schulz, who farms 6,000 acres, said that without his $100,000maximum payment he might have been forced to sell equipment or layoff help.
Along with crop insurance and the sale of grain reserves, hesaid, ``I was able to mark time in '88.
Grindberg, who farms 900 acres of wheat, soybeans and barley,was in the red last year despite $70,000 in aid and insurance.
His1989 crop was better but still below normal; he expects to get only$3,000 in relief payments.
Grindberg, a 40-year farming veteran who also delivers mailpart-time, thinks the government last year ``pushed he panic buttonon this disaster thing and went too far.
In '89, they went too farthe other way I think.''
If it's an election year ... they all get on the bandwagon.''
