Introduction: For months, this county's politically astute Sheriff Sherman Block maintaineda low profile for himself and his department while city police were beinghammered after the videotaped beating of black motorist Rodney King.
Butthen sheriff's deputies shot four people dead in the space of one month.
Thecorruption case of an elite drug unit continued to make headlines.
Threedeputies were charged with stealing credit cards from elderly people.
Andallegations that the department is home to white supremacist gangs resurfaced.
Block's measured responseto the criticism -- and the lack of a riveting videotape -- have spared himthe level of heat felt by Police Chief Daryl Gates.
"JosephMcNamara, retired chief of San Jose's department and now a fellow at StanfordUniversity's Hoover Institution, said he has been getting calls all summerfrom cities around the country about racism and brutality in theirdepartments.
"There's got to be a revolution in American policing,"McNamara said.
"But some observerssay that, for a variety of political and social reasons, the possibility forsubstantive change on L.A. law's front lines is scant.
The Christopher Commission's scathing report mademore than 100 recommendations, many of them aimed at moving away from thedepartment's "hard-nosed" approach and improving relations with residents.
At the street level, it suggested officers spend more time out of their patrolcars, work more with community groups and ease up on the common practice ofmaking suspects lie face down on the ground even when they pose no apparentthreat.
But Block has dug in his heels, insisting a panel heappointed is independent enough to advise which Christopher Commissionrecommendations might apply to his department.
Critics say its leaders havebeen supporters of the local law establishment.
"The sheriff has said that his department continually re-examinesitself and launched several Christopher Commission recommendations before thecommission even existed -- but that it can't do everything.
(But) We're a last-resortmechanism when other kinder and gentler processes fail in our society.
"Block pointed to social ills including high drop-out andilliteracy rates, "young people who are raising themselves," and a county jailsystem that is "perhaps the major houser of mentally ill people in our societyin this nation.
"Countywide, homicides soared to 1,964 last year, comparedwith 1,463 five years earlier.
But somecritics are skeptical that the police culture here will change significantly.
And although he can be votedout, they say, the voters include great numbers of people in cities that hisdepartment doesn't patrol.
John Burton, an attorney specializing in policemisconduct cases, offers a grim view on the potential for change: "I thinkit's going to get worse, because of the general decay in social conditions andunemployment.
The government doesn't have anything to offer except policerepression, so that's what we get."
