But De Beers not only halted a fall in rough-diamond prices, it raised them an average 14.5% last year.
Figures for 1986 aren't yet available, but De Beers says it was another record.
The master sales plan began in 1938, when former De Beers Chairman Harry Oppenheimer asked Ayer to woo American couples to buy expensive diamond engagement rings.
1 market, with $8 billion in annual retail diamond jewelry sales, or about a 40% share, even though a 1971 antitrust law prevents De Beers from operating directly there.
About three-fourths of American women own diamond engagement rings that cost an average $1,300.
One out of 17 Japanese couples bought engagement rings two decades ago.
Now two-thirds do, and Japan is the second-largest diamond jewelry market, followed by West Germany.
De Beers's Central Selling Organization, known as the Syndicate, is the pipeline between diamond mines and dealers based mainly in Antwerp, Belgium; Bombay, India; Tel Aviv, Israel, and New York.
De Beers offers its cache to select dealers 10 times a year at sales known as "sights."
If the dealer refuses to buy, De Beers may never invite him back.
This ritual has enabled De Beers to maintain price stability.
The cartel hasn't cut prices since it was founded more than half a century ago.
OPEC members "tend to do what they like," says Jo Flies, chief economist of the Antwerp Diamond Council.
But De Beers is unique, he says, in influencing production and consumption of diamonds.
"People mesmerized by the producers' cartels forget that De Beers is an aggressive, ruthless and effective sales organization," says a London dealer.
Some analysts warn, however, that De Beers's future may be affected by the surge in diamond output elsewhere, notably Australia.
About 20% of the prize diamonds are produced in southern Africa, but the market is being flooded by cheaper diamonds mainly from Australia and Zaire.
The Soviet Union, which produces an estimated 12 million carats of top-grade diamonds annually, is another unknown.
Angola left the cartel last year, partly because it is involved in a bitter war with South African-backed rebels.
Other African nations in the cartel want more control over distribution, dealers say.
"De Beers can't stop evolution," says Jack Lunzer, chairman of IDC Holdings Ltd., a London-based diamond firm that sells diamonds for Guinea, an African nation that isn't a cartel member.
While sales independence from De Beers "could be disastrous" for the market, Mr. Lunzer says, that won't deter those producers who want "more information and knowledge about final sales of their material."
But the fate of De Beers, South Africa's most famous company, will depend largely on developments in that troubled country, dealers say.
Recent history indicates, however, that it would be hasty to write off the cartel.
In 1981, Zaire, which mines 22% of world diamond output, left the cartel.
In a series of shrewd moves, De Beers forced Zaire to rejoin the cartel by dumping diamonds.
Since November 1985, prices of D-Flawless diamonds have risen 56% to around $14,000 a carat. "
The cartel will continue to control world diamond markets, Mr. Lachosky says.
