Introduction:learned about the Shining Path meeting, according to an intelligence report datelined 31 March that states it was held in Razuhuillca, Huanta Province, Ayacucho.
As a result, Peruvian Air Force troops carried out operations in the aforementioned area during the second week of April.
Dincote also obtained information according to which "Feliciano" presided over the meeting, during which it was decided to start a new phase of the "people's war" as well as plan an operation to rescue Abimael Guzman, dead or alive, at any cost.
The leadership may be wiped out completely or partially, but those leaders who are not must and can continue carrying out plans, the struggle, the people's war.
The document even mentions what must be done with those who uphold peace and put down arms: "There are two reasons for surrendering: to surrender in view of local reaction and to surrender in view of international reaction.
Its purpose is to ruin the revolution.
Those who surrender, therefore, are no good, and must be wiped out through fire and bloodshed."
This plenum was labeled "glorious, historic, and momentous" as it planned the terrible wave of violence unleashed by the Shining Path in July 1992.
During the 1992 partisan meeting, it was stated that during an adverse situation the party should draft "a new plan, taking into account the experience of the past years, establish new axes, sub-axes, guidelines, and lines of action with a nationwide criteria (...), seek new ways to develop and set up strategic military plans, and establish, for example, those objectives and carry them out on an established date."
It seems that the Third Central Committee Plenum's assessment of what was happening to the Shining Path was negative and, therefore, it was decided to unleash a fierce wave of violence in order to conceal the weaknesses of the Maoist organization.
During the working meeting, and in addition to approving the efforts to "step up investigations to determine the sanctions for those who are found responsible" for contributing to the arrest of Abimael Guzman, it was agreed, among other issues:   1.
To defend the life of "President Gonzalo" by widely preaching our ideology, by showing great courage, placing even our lives at stake, by keeping our red and invincible flag flying high, and by pursuing our unwavering objective: communism."
To reassert the conclusions of the Third Central Committee Plenum (March 1992), "personally presided over by President Gonzalo, whose victorious appearance revealed its glorious, historic, and momentous nature; the second most important milestone after the congress (held in 1988)."
Abimael Guzman's letters to President Alberto Fujimori, the telephone conversation between Guzman and Javier Esparza Marquez (Guzman's brother-in-law, who is in charge of Shining Path's organization abroad), and the communiques released by Shining Path prisoners "are a counterrevolutionary scheme concocted by Yankee imperialists and the genocidal and traitorous dictatorship with the sinister help of the Black Group," the Central Committee concluded at its February meeting.
The Black Group is made up of "infiltrators, traitors, weaklings, and old revisionists, linked directly to reactionaries," meaning Osman Morote, Elena Iparraguire, Maria Pantoja, Martha Huatay, Edmundo Cox, and others who are in touch with government representatives and prison officials.
Actions that go against principles cannot be accepted" because "it is an international communist rule that the leadership (of the party and the war) cannot be exercised from prison," and because "monstrosities like the `peace accord'(...) clash with our principles."
The Central Committee meeting that "Feliciano" presided over clearly defined its position toward Abimael Guzman Reinoso, whose ideological contribution to the people's war, called "Gonzalo's Thoughts," was acknowledged.
Gonzalo's "leadership" was also accepted but, as he is operationally restricted, he cannot lead the party anymore.
Guzman and the leaders who support his decision to hold talks with the administration signed a communique that was released in March.
This communique "warned against" and "denounced" the reports of "Feliciano's" Central Committee, which decided to go on with the war.
Under the guise of defending the party, they are undermining it and its leadership so as to bring about its defeat, by using empty rhetoric to disguise their partisan, opportunistic, and personal interests and ambitions, and by taking a blind, biased, subjective, and superficial approach to concrete reality.
To continue it means sabotaging the peace agreement.
We warn our members against militaristic and revisionist approaches, and urge them to keep their eyes open to unmask this or any other scheme."
Guzman's call upon the militants in action to "abide" by the decision to hold talks with the administration in order to stop the war, and to fight those who disagree with this decision, is persistent: "Once again we warn the militants to be on guard against any desperate action, adventure, or provocation from third parties, because the goal of all this is to scuttle the proposed peace agreement.
The Dincote report lists the steps that "Feliciano's" followers are taking to carry out actions that would put Shining Path back in the political picture.
The report states that the Shining Path is expected "to carry out isolated actions at key targets in order to demonstrate its operational capacity."
Intelligence agents believe that the most likely targets are "financial companies, banks, stores, and industries, in order to sow confusion among local and foreign investors."
Other likely targets are "soon-to-be-privatized public energy and mining companies, the embassies of countries whose citizens are purchasing Peruvian companies, and the interests that these countries already have in Peru.
Government politicians and high-ranking members of the forces of order are also among the main targets.
The counterterrorism police believe that the Shining Path "urgently needs to demonstrate its power in order to get out of its current defensive position. "
Dincote's intelligence reports adds that the internal strife in the Shining Path has reached the level of killings among militants, so it is likely that there will be a "settling of accounts."
Shining Path members believe that surrender deserves capital punishment.
The Dincote report, which confirmed that "Feliciano" presided over a Shining Path Central Committee meeting somewhere in Razuillca, added that it has been decided to "rescue Abimael Guzman Reinoso, dead or alive."
The report explains that "Israeli experts in hostage rescue and underwater operations (demolition) have been hired for this purpose."
The Shining Path also considered the possibility of winning over Peruvian security forces personnel "so as to attract new members, including Armed Forces Special Operations personnel. "
Feliciano" claims that the "forged letters" sent to President Alberto Fujimori, the communiques supporting the peace agreement signed by Shining Path prisoners in Canto Grande, Chorrillos, and Yanamayo, and the statements and gestures of Osman Morote Bariionuevo and Edmundo Cox Beuzeville are all part of this plot.
As far as "Feliciano" is concerned, rescuing Guzman Reinoso, dead or alive, is just a symbolic gesture in any case.
