Introduction: Prolonged drought, bark beetles and a rare fungus are drying out and killing brush and trees that surround many Southern California neighborhoods, creating the potential for one of the worst wildfire seasons in decades, fire officials warned Monday.
A map released Monday by the Los Angeles County Fire Department showed that some of the most vulnerable fire zones can be found this summer in chaparral-covered foothill and mountain-canyon slopes beside densely developed residential districts of Los Angeles and its suburbs.
The map was released as the state Department of Forestry officially opened the region's 1990 fire season, which means its firefighting crews have been placed on higher alert and various fire prevention regulations are now in effect.
While the fire-season announcement came only two to three weeks earlier than usual in the vulnerable foothills, it was a full two months ahead of schedule in the heavily wooded mountain terrain of Southern California's national forests.
"The last really good rainfall was back in '82-83, so our brush really hasn't recuperated in seven years," said Gordon Rowley, a fire management specialist with the U.S. Forest Service.
Rowley said other Western states also are experiencing drought, "which means they won't be able to send us the firefighting forces they normally can deploy out here.
Los Angeles, which has an annual average of 14.93 inches of rainfall, has received 6.18 inches so far this season, promising to make this the driest season in 30 years.
The rainfall season, which runs from July 1 to June 30, is almost over for 1989-90, and Southern California seldom gets much measurable rain in late May and the month of June.
But since then, the annual rainfall here has averaged only 11.57 inches.
He said that with normal rainfall, pine trees are vigorous enough to fight off bark beetles, which bore into trunks and limbs to lay their eggs.
He said healthy trees repel the insects with a flow of pitch that suffocates them and forces them out of the bark.
Rowley said the insects have proliferated, killing vast stands of pines and leaving tinder-dry fuel for fires.
In foothill districts closer to Los Angeles, a fungus that preys upon drought-weakened brush has killed as much as 60% of the chaparral in some portions of the Santa Monica and San Gabriel mountains.
The fungus, first observed about eight years ago, attacks broad-leafed plants such as mountain lilac, manzanita and sumac, some of the more fire-resistant species of brush.
Officials said large patches of this dead and dying brush now mottle the hillsides, ready to burst into flame at the slightest spark.
Fire officials generally have responded to the threat with increased training and requests for federal money to pay for extra firefighting personnel.
winds -- the kind of Santa Anas we get in September -- behind all that, a fire can consume 100 acres a minute and keep right on going," Franklin said.
Especially threatened suburban communities include portions of Rolling Hills, Rancho Palos Verdes, Beverly Hills, Glendale, Pasadena, Altadena, Arcadia, Monrovia, Bradbury, Duarte, Azusa, Glendora, Claremont and Whittier.
Doug Allen, a fire prevention officer with the state Division of Forestry, said residents should clear tall grass, brush, trash, firewood and other combustibles at least 30 feet from any building.
Fire officials say these are areas where blazes can start and expand rapidly, spreading from open land to homes and other structures.
Do not drive motor vehicles in off-road areas where brush and grass grow.
In case of fire, turn off all tap water unless instructed otherwise.
