Introduction:Over the past two years, the Ventura County district attorney's office in four separate incidents has declined to prosecute suspects who contended that they were victims of police brutality while being arrested for various offenses by Oxnard officers, records show.
In a fifth and more recent incident, the district attorney's office declined to file a charge of assaulting an officer against an Oxnard man who says he and several other guests at a June 15 private party were beaten by Oxnard police.
Instead, Anthony Flores, 22, was charged with five misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest.
In each of the four cases, Brodie said, his office did not prosecute because it found that police did not provide enough evidence to prove the charges "beyond a reasonable doubt."
But Jean Farley, a supervisor for the Ventura County public defender's office, said it is extremely rare for the district attorney's office not to prosecute a suspect who is accused by police.
It began when four officers answered complaints about a loud party.
Police had arrested Flores on suspicion of assaulting an officer and of resisting arrest but the district attorney's office decided two weeks later to prosecute Flores on the five misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest. "
Police Chief Robert Owens has ordered an investigation into the incident.
In an incident April 7, Sergio E. Gonzalez, 19, accused Oxnard officers of ordering a police dog to attack him before he was arrested.
In a suit filed June 29, Gonzalez said he was standing on Sunkist Circle when the dog attacked him, biting him on the arm and left shoulder.
Gonzalez was taken to St. John's Regional Medical Center, where he underwent surgery and spent two weeks recovering from his injuries.
Edward M. Fox, an attorney representing Gonzalez, said his client, a gardener, might suffer some permanent injury to his right arm.
Cole's report said Gonzalez was found hiding in the parking lot and "was bit by a police service dog during the arrest."
Police arrested Gonzalez on suspicion of disturbing the peace, Brodie said.
In a third incident, Louis M. Cornett, a retired teacher and licensed gun dealer, said he was beaten on Oct. 20 while in custody at Oxnard police headquarters.
Cornett said the altercation began as he was returning home after scouting out a site for quail hunting near Santa Maria.
Officer Robert Camarillo said in a police report that Cornett was arrested in the 3600 block of Taffrail Road on suspicion of brandishing a weapon, resisting arrest and possessing a loaded firearm.
When he searched Cornett's car, Camarillo said, he found a semiautomatic handgun, several rounds of ammunition and a 12-gauge shotgun.
Camarillo admitted that he later shoved Cornett against a wall at police headquarters because the suspect had struggled and had clenched his fists in a threatening manner.
But a lawsuit against Camarillo filed May 8, 1989, alleges that while in custody at the police station, Camarillo shoved and punched Cornett in the mouth. "
Cornett, maintaining that he never struggled with the officer, said he suffered a broken tooth and a cut lip during the beating.
The district attorney's office declined to file charges against Cornett because, Brodie said, there was insufficient evidence to prove that Cornett brandished a gun.
In a fourth incident, Alejandro Guzman-Flores, 21, accused three Oxnard officers of beating him on his face, causing severe damage to his eyesight.
Guzman-Flores said he was working in a motorcycle repair shop on Jan. 27, 1989, when his boss asked him to investigate a noise in the alley behind the shop in the 1500 block of South Pine Street.
In a suit filed against the city Nov. 14, 1989, the Police Department and officers Jana Younger, Fred Sedillos and James Struck, Guzman-Flores contends that he was grabbed from behind by Younger while in the alley.
The officer poked him with a baton and questioned him about a car parked nearby, Guzman-Flores said in the suit.
McCracken said the officers continued to question Flores in English, but Flores -- a recent immigrant from Mexico who speaks only Spanish -- could not respond.
Sedillos got up and punched and kicked Flores several times while Younger held Flores in a "choke-hold," the suit alleges.
Flores was arrested on suspicion of resisting arrest and obstructing an officer.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Flores but later dismissed all charges during Flores' trial because police failed to turn over a recording of a dispatcher's call requesting that officers investigate the incident at the motorcycle shop, McCracken said.
McCracken said Flores was beaten so severely that he suffered a detached retina and might lose partial sight in one eye. "
They essentially beat the hell out of him for nothing," she said.
Luna said in an interview that he, his wife and several friends were leaving the restaurant on July 16, 1988, when an Oxnard police car pulled up in front of the group.
Luna, a public works inspector for the city of Port Hueneme, said he walked up to the police car and asked Officer Peter Ruggiero "in a kidding manner" what he was doing in Port Hueneme. "
Officers Steven Vendt and Humberto Jimenez were called to assist Ruggiero, the complaint said.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Luna, but in September, 1988 -- before his trial began -- all charges against him were withdrawn for lack of evidence, Brodie said.
Owens ordered the department's internal affairs division to investigate Luna's complaint.
