Introduction: NEGOTIATIONS FOR a new contract between Botswana, the world's most importantdiamond producer in value terms, and De Beers, the South African group whichcontrols 80 per cent of the market for rough (uncut) diamonds, are takingmuch longer than expected.
The previous three-year contract ended onDecember 31.Some Botswana politicians want to change De Beers' exclusive sales contractso that part of their country's output can be sold independently of theSouth African group's international cartel.
Mr Nicholas Oppenheimer, chairman of thegroup's Central Selling Organisation, argues that if Botswana chose not tosell its production exclusively through his organisation, the CSO's abilityto regulate the distribution of rough diamonds would be compromised.
'In presentations to Botswana's Minerals Policy Committee and members ofparliament, IDC has been arguing that, not only was it commerciallyessential for Botswana to understand the real value of its diamond output,but that the country had a political responsibility to do so.
'If Botswana were to sell 10 per cent of its rough diamond production, worthabout USDollars 100m, independently of the CSO - which sells about Dollars4bn-worth a year from all over the world - it would represent no threat tomarket stability, IDC said.
It claims analysts have estimated that 50 per cent of De Beers' diamondprofits in 1989 came from Botswana. '
This profit is disproportionate to thesale of diamonds by Debswana (De Beers' subsidiary in Botswana) to the CSOas a percentage of the CSO's total sales profits,' IDC says.
'Other substantial producers such as the Soviet Union, Angola, Zaire andAustralia do not sell all their production to the CSO and therefore haveaccess to independent market information.
But 'the fact that the CSO formspart of an aggressive, profit-motivated public company with a primaryresponsibility to its shareholders is often lost from view.
However, in commonwith other producers selling diamonds to the CSO, Botswana has appointedindependent valuers who continuously monitor diamond production and theprices paid.
Mr Geoffrey Leggett at IDC suggests, however, the valuer only ensures thatthe assortment of diamonds from Botswana conforms to an agreed sample andthat the agreed contract price is paid. '
'De Beers insists it remains on cordial terms with Botswana and says thecountry is still selling its diamonds through the CSO.
Analysts suggest market conditions do not help Botswana press its case.
DeBeers, which itself mines about 40 per cent of the world's annual roughdiamond output, markets stones from Angola, Australia, Namibia, Tanzania,Zaire and the Soviet Union, as well as South Africa and Botswana.
Prices of rough diamonds, with few exceptions, have moved upwards every yearsince the 1930s depression.
In addition, Botswana this year faces its first budgetary deficit since 1982and, according to De Beers' calculations, one of its diamond mines  - Orapa -needs investment of USDollars 600m.
The CSO has also notched up some recent coups: bringing a big part of theSoviet Union's and Angola's rough diamond output back into the cartel - orwhat it calls its 'single channel marketing' - arrangements.
