Now a detailed NewYork Times/CBS poll has found that Members of Congress may bethe only demographic group in the country that doesn't favorlimits on terms.
Women aremore in favor of the idea than men.
Martin Plissner,political director for CBS News, says he has "never seen anissue on which there was so little demographic variation.
In the past three elections, 96% or more of Houseincumbents who ran won.
Congress just violated its legal budgetdeadline; where are the special prosecutors?Franking privileges, huge staffs, gerrymandering andunfair campaign finance laws have combined to give incumbentsa grossly unfair advantage.
One out of four House districtsthis year likely will have an incumbent running with nomajor-party opposition -- up from one out of five in 1988.One-candidate races are now spreading to the Senate.
Itcontains five pictures of the Senator and mentions his name29 times on four pages.
Critics of term-limits say that -- franked mail or not --it's wrong to blame Congress for the now nearly 100%re-election rates since it is just as easy to vote against anincumbent as for.
Michael Kinsley writes in the New Republicthat if incumbents always win, it's because voters can't bebothered.
This presumes that voters can find out who the othercandidate is.
It is a political axiom that people won't votefor someone they know nothing about.
That takes money, andskewed campaign finance laws combined with taxpayer-paid junkmail effectively mean that only incumbents have the cash tomake themselves known and to be taken seriously by the media.
Some complain that limiting terms would infringe ondemocracy by not allowing voters to elect whom they please.
We also note that these critics are not agitating in supportof Ronald Reagan's call for repeal of the two-term limit forPresidents.
A big problem of the current system limitingPresidents but not Congress is that this means politicalpower is constantly tipped in favor of the legislativebranch.
Self-imposed limits on office-holding were once part ofthis country's public-service ethic, with Members returningto private life after a couple of terms.
The number offreshmen in a new House never dipped below 30% until 1901.
Inthe current House it is 8%.Term limitation, once the accepted American tradition, hasbeen replaced by congressional careerism.
They now think the voluntary service limitation ofthe past must be made mandatory.
