"I'm stunned," said Santa Ana City Council member Miguel A. Pulido.
Pulido and other Santa Ana council members say that the 1980 census substantially under-counted its population at 215,000.
The Senate's action came on a voice vote, despite arguments from the Bush Administration and other opponents that it is both unconstitutional and unworkable.
Would Urge Veto Even if the prohibition survives, Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher has said that he would ask President Bush to veto any bill that comes to his desk with such a provision.
At stake are the number of seats in Congress for California, Florida, New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania and other states that will be reapportioned on the basis of next year's census.
Federal aid to states also is frequently based on population counts, so millions of dollars in grants and other funds made available on a per capita basis would be affected.
State officials have said California could lose up to $300 million in federal aid if illegal aliens were uncounted.
Santa Ana has estimated its potential loss at $2 million a year.
In addition, Pulido and county advocates for poor Latino residents expressed concern that the decision would promote fear and intimidation in the community.
"For example, we have close to 50,000 people in the city that have qualified through the amnesty process for legal residency," Pulido said.
"Those individuals, when asked or challenged about their status, can be legitimately concerned.
But Pulido said he believes the House of Representatives will not allow the prohibition to survive, especially since it killed an earlier, similar effort.
"The bottom line is illegal aliens ought to be deported, not counted," Cochran said.
"There are enormous additional costs for states who have had a surge of population," Wilson said, adding that those states should receive additional federal aid to cope with the added problems.
The Senate's action would also have an impact on smaller California cities without substantial Latino populations because census population figures play an important role in Community Development Block Grant formulas, said Don Vestal, Westminster city planner.
Westminster is following a recommendation by the Census Bureau to form a Complete Count Committee of officials and community leaders to help ensure cooperation from all city residents.
The Community Development Block Grant formula, among other things, Vestal said, includes use of income figures and percentage of lower income residents in the city. "
"Whether you count them or not, the undocumented residents are still going to impact federal dollars in our community.
In recent weeks, representatives from the census office in Santa Ana have visited such social centers as Abrazar and others and told center staff people that they intend to count "everyone, regardless of where they came from," McDonough said.
"Their big thing was, 'We do not care about the origins of where these people are from, but, more importantly, their impact to local economies,' " she said.
Opponents of a ban on counting illegal aliens said that a ban is impractical because the Census Bureau has already printed questionnaires that do not contain any question about legality of residence.
The Senate's action was sharply criticized by Undersecretary of Commerce Michael Darby, but he voiced hope that it would be reversed by a Senate-House conference.
"There really is a widespread realization that this would not only be unconstitutional but literally impossible," Darby said.
But he added that he is "optimistic, cautiously optimistic," that House conferees would resist the Senate-approved ban and not force Bush to veto the legislation.
"It is going to have a dramatic and disastrous impact in the Hispanic community," Moreno said.
"Our position is that we count everybody at their place of residence," said bureau spokesman James Gorman.
