This Cape Cod country road is deserted, but for the sweatysilhouette of John Kelley.
Bounding up a hill in his thin green Windbreaker, withsand from the beach blowing into his face, Mr. Kelley shoutsover the howling gale: "This isn't too bad, you know," hesays, though the wind chill factor is about 20 below.
And even at the age of 83, he probablywill finish ahead of a large number of the 13,000 runnersexpected to compete -- officially or unofficially -- on April15.Bill Rodgers, a four-time Boston Marathon winner who plansto run again this year, marvels at Mr. Kelley: "It'sincomprehensible that a man his age is doing what he's doing.
Aghast is more like it," says Leslie Pawson, 86, athree-time Boston champion who ran against Mr. Kelley half acentury ago.
Ican't even remember when I ran my last marathon.
A two-time winnerin Boston (1935 and 1945) and runner-up seven times, Mr. Kelley is to be the oldest competitor in the race this year-- as he has been for 15 years.
("That means I don't have to pay taxes there," he jokes.)
Twostate troopers will run alongside the 5-foot-6, 130-pound Mr. Kelley into Boston so he won't be trampled by "groupies," ashe calls them, clamoring to shake his hand.
Recalls SuniTomomitsu, one of the runners: "At first we thought, `Oh,wow, he's like Mafia man.'
Then we said, `Oh no, this is niceJohnny Kelley.'
Of course, Mr. Kelley -- not to be confused with the otherJohn Kelley, who won the Boston Marathon in 1957 -- isn't therunner he was in 1935 when he won the race, in 2 hours, 32minutes, 7 seconds.
His best time ever was in 1945: 2 hours,30 minutes, 40 seconds.
"That's not aprediction, just a goal," he says.
When John Kelley first toed the line in 1928, George Bushwasn't yet in kindergarten, Joe DiMaggio was an unknown andNike was the winged goddess of victory, not a running shoe.
In those days, Mr. Kelley recalls, he ran in black leatherhigh-jumping shoes that he cut open at the toes with a razorblade.
Back then, the sport didn't have much of a following.
Today, of course, the Boston Marathon is a big deal, coveredby TV from start to finish and offering $402,000 altogetherin prize money.
"The winners get a medal and $55,000," says Mr. Kelley.
Physiologically,whatever that means, I got all A's," Mr. Kelley reports ofhis checkup four months ago.
"What that means," explains Kenneth Cooper, the physicianwho wrote "Aerobics" and several sequels and is now at workon a book on elderly athletes, "is that Johnny has the bodyof a man 23 years younger.
He's going to be one of the starsof my book."
A mechanic for Boston Edison Co. before he retired in1972, Mr. Kelley started running in the evenings after workmore than six decades ago.
His only purpose was to relax andhave some fun. "
All day long, I did what my boss told me todo," he recalls.
He dropped out three-quarters ofthe way through the race.
Then, in 1933, he finished 37th ina field of about 200 runners.
(He has competed, alltold, in 112 marathons, including the 1936 and 1948 Olympics.
A mile and a half later,there's new reason to beware: The smells of Cavanaugh'sBakery can set off hunger pangs.
An Exxon station in Wellesley marks the halfway point.
Asteep descent into Newton Lower Falls can jar a tiredrunner's bones.
It cost him atleast two victories, he says.
And finally there's the HauntedMile, a stretch where many runners have collapsed.
Boston'sskyline, 2 1/2 miles in the distance, can seem so far away.
Though still going strong, Mr. Kelley acknowledges themarathon gets tougher each year.
He used to start preparing in earnest at the end ofJanuary. "
(He doesn't count the mileshe puts in, as many long-distance runners obsessively do, buthe says he wouldn't object to an estimate of about 50 miles aweek.)Mr.
In January, he prefers the frozen sands of thebeach.
After his morning run, he spends a coupleof hours painting (still lifes and Cape Cod scenes), a hobbyhe took up about 25 years ago.
Unlike many runners, Mr. Kelley doesn't bother withstretching exercises before he runs in the morning. "
"He and his wife, Laura, live in a two-bedroom ranch-stylehouse here in East Dennis, with more than 350 trophies,medals and sweat-stained marathon numbers scattered about.
Kelley aims to run till he is at least 100 years old.
"He's a strange man," says Laura Kelley, in awe of herhusband's vigor.
The 82-year-old Mrs. Kelley adds, "I justtry to stay in his shadow, but I have a hard time even doingthat.
If for some reason I don't finish the marathon, Idon't owe an apology to anyone.
But I'll tell you, the BostonMarathon -- with all those people waving -- is better than mybirthday.
