Introduction: While there is agreement in virtually every quarter that something needs to be done about welfare, disagreement remains over exactly what to do.
The White House has a formula for welfare reform, as do Sens.
Now the nation's governors are asking Washington to adopt their plan.
They would require all able-bodied welfare recipients (except mothers with children under 3 years of age) to work in exchange for their benefits.
The results in Massachusetts, California, Illinois, Pennsylvania and Utah have been promising.
Substantial numbers of welfare recipients have moved into jobs and off the public rolls.
One item on the governors' agenda that Mr. Reagan didn't go for was a national minimum level for an individual recipients's welfare benefits.
By setting aside more money for job training, day care and other support, they say, taxpayers would ultimately realize savings as welfare recipients are weaned from the public rolls.
But taxpayers can be forgiven if they view this part of the governors' argument with skepticism.
After all, Americans have spent more than $1 trillion over the past two decades to alleviate poverty and curb dependency without seeing evidence of an appreciable return on their substantial investment.
An extra $2 billion a year added to the present anti-poverty programs (which, as we have mentioned before, if simply handed out in cash would be enough to lift every poor household in America above poverty) is unlikely to accomplish all that the governors promise.
Oversold political programs and promises are largely what got us into this mess.
Most important, the governors would require that welfare recipients do something productive in exchange for their benefits, be it completing school, receiving vocational training or holding a job.
Only by requiring individual initiative and productivity can welfare recipients ever achieve self-sufficiency.
The degree of consensus forming around welfare reform is unusual.
On this point, at least, there doesn't seem to be much conflict.
