Introduction: Patience is often difficult to muster for those who run the 26.2 miles of a marathon.
The tendency is to want to finish the race as soon as possible and get a head start on recovering from it.
Rex Wilson of New Zealand patiently waited for the lead pack to sort itself out, took the lead at 10 miles and rolled to a victory in 2 hours 12 minutes 27 seconds, a course record.
The old record of 2:13:22 was set in 1986 by Ric Sayre.
Yanmin broke the old record of 2:44:51 set last year by Dianne Rodgers.
Robert Molinatti of Huntington Beach won the wheelchair division in 1:47:59.
Run as a race within a race was the Pacific Rim Marathon, which consists of teams from invited countries.
Wilson and Yanmin won both the Long Beach Marathon and the Pacific Rim race, for total prize money of $9,500 each.
The men's race was led at various times by a pack of about six runners.
American food also did not agree with Gural -- his stomach was upset.
He dropped from third to fifth in the race's final stages.
Samson Obwocha, a Kenyan who lives in Gardena, waited for Gural to fade and then made his move.
"I didn't really want to lead all the way," Wilson said.
"I hate the marathon," Wilson, 28, said, sounding quite sensible. "
Those little bridges at the end were like mountains."
Still, Wilson built a healthy lead on those "mountains" in Belmont Shores.
Yanmin had to come from behind for her victory, giving the women's race an exciting finish.
Guadalupe Roman of Mexico led through much of the race but lost ground steadily in the last five miles and finished sixth.
Two Soviet runners -- Irina Ruban and Tatiana Zueva -- who had run side-by-side in third and fourth place throughout the race, faded.
Konatz was happy with her second place time of 2:43:50.
Asked if she was ever aware of Yanmin during the race, Konatz laughed. "
The marathon is an unpredictable event," she said.
"I knew at 25 miles if someone had a good kick.
So did Ngaire Drake of New Zealand, who was third in 2:44:09.
