The great storms have madefictional plots of B movies and unmade real dreams of people who would implantcivilization in an environment that could be swallowed up by nature in amoment.
Nine years earlier, a "BigOne" had stopped Miami's first real-estate boom in its tracks, pushingfloodwaters inland to the new jai alai fronton near where Miami InternationalAirport sits today.
What would one of those legendarystorms of the past with 200 mph winds pushing huge tidal surges do to thislow-lying metropolis on the Atlantic?
Hurricane seasonofficially extends from June 1 through Nov. 30, and scientists at the NationalHurricane Center, tucked away on the sixth floor of a nondescript officebuilding in this Miami suburb, are perking up after another winter lull.
In this part of the world,technology has made obsolete such disasters as the unnamed hurricane thatsurprised Galveston, Texas, in 1900, killing 6,000 people.
One of the specialists, Lixion Avila, hasbegun counting tropical waves that form off the coast of Africa every few daysduring hurricane season.
Fourteen becametropical storms, seven of which became hurricanes, fewer than usual.
People who venture into such dubious endeavors as long-term hurricaneforecasting said this could be another light year.
But, they said, arelatively quiet year does not guarantee a thing.
More than 800 workers, brought down to build the Overseas Highway through theFlorida Keys, were killed when 200 mph winds knocked their evacuation trainoff the tracks.
NO MATTER what long-range forecasters say, scientists atthe Hurricane Center know that the laws of probability are closing in onMiami.
They are a conservative bunch, not given to Sunday-supplement scarestories.
Miami has grown immensely since the last major storm and is greatlyoverdue, they said.
"Historically, south Florida has had more hurricanesthan any other site," said Jerry Jarrell, a hurricane specialist eyeingMiami's 27-year hiatus nervously.
"We would expect a major hurricane to hitwithin 75 miles of Miami every eight years.
"How many high-rises did they have on those barrierislands up in South Carolina?
"A worst-case storm,with winds topping 150 mph, would put 5 feet of water in Joe's Stone Crabsrestaurant, a Miami Beach landmark, and 9 feet of water on Biscayne Boulevardin downtown Miami.
DESPITE MODERN technology, the specialistscannot forecast precisely where a hurricane will hit.
Mayfield went toMiami Beach recently to discuss his model with officials there, and what heheard worried him.
"The fire department did a survey, and 90 percent ofthe people they talked to said they wouldn't evacuate for a hurricane,"Mayfield said.
