Introduction: This nation's volatile election was postponed today as the country was plungedinto shock and turmoil after Tuesday's assassination of former Prime MinisterRajiv Gandhi.
India's military and paramilitary forces were put on "red alert" as gangstook to the streets of New Delhi and other cities, looking for scapegoats.
Seshan, early this morning postponedthe remaining two phases of the national parliamentary elections until nextmonth.
At least 14 other people, including a senior police officer, died in theblast.
Officials in New Delhi said the blast was caused by either a timebomb or remote-control device.
A Congress Party spokesman said the bomb washidden in a bouquet of flowers offered to Gandhi as he approached the dais forhis speech.
It is not clear whether the bomb was thrown at Gandhi orwhether he was handed flowers that contained explosives.
He had been receivingbouquets and garlands all evening.
There was no immediate indication who was responsible forthe bomb, but speculation centered on Tamil separatists seeking an independentstate in nearby Sri Lanka.
"When you look at hiscontribution to international order and you think of his decency, it's atragedy," Bush said in Washington.
End of dynastyGandhi's death marksthe likely end of the political dynasty that has dominated Indian politicssince independence in 1947.
Analysts here said there is no obvious successorto him as leader of the Congress Party, which was founded by his grandfather,Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, and later dominated by hismother, Indira Gandhi, who was prime minister when she was assassinated in1984.This morning, Gandhi's body was flown to a stunned New Delhi.
His widow, Sonia, sobbed and hugged the couple's daughter Priyanka as thewomen stepped down from the air force Boeing 737 that had flown them to Madrasto bring Gandhi's body home.
Even before Gandhi's death, more than 150people had died this week in violence connected to the election.
After theassassination, violent mobs rampaged along roads leading to Madras on Tuesdaynight, smashing vehicles and other property, according to Indian newsagencies.
Government officials in New Delhi ordered all governmentoffices, schools and colleges shut amid widespread fears that theassassination would touch off a wave of violence in a country that has endureda spate of riots during the past year, mainly over religious and casteconflicts.
Outside Gandhi's house in New Delhi on Tuesday night, hundredsof angry Congress Party workers chanted slogans against the CIA, accusing theU.S.
The CIA is oftenblamed by India's conspiracy-minded political activists for a wide variety ofthe country's ills.
Home ransackedSome demonstrators in New Delhi setfire to the home of a political rival and attacked foreign camera operators.
People broke into the house of Gandhi's neighbor, former Labor Minister RamVilas Paswan, and set furniture ablaze, police said.
Police fired shots inthe air to drive away the angry, shouting crowd.
Someshocked Indian political leaders told reporters they feared Rajiv Gandhi'sassassination augured the death of India's four-decades-old democracy.
"It's a tremendousloss to democracy," senior Congress leader Vasant Sathe told reporters. "
J.B. Patnaik, a powerful Congress politician inthe eastern state of Orissa, said: "I don't know what is going to happen now,how democracy will survive.
"At the site of the bomb blast in Tamil Nadu,there was no immediate evidence as to who was responsible.
Guerrillas suspectedMost of the early speculation, however,focused on Gandhi's most hardened opponents in Tamil Nadu, the LiberationTigers of Tamil Eelam, a disciplined and violent guerrilla force that has usedTamil Nadu as a base in its campaign to win a separate state in Sri Lanka, theisland nation just off India's southeastern coast.
The Tamil Tigers haveassassinated dozens of political enemies in Sri Lanka and southern India,often using powerful plastic explosives set off by remote control.
Earlierthis year, the state government of Tamil Nadu was dismissed and central ruleimposed after allegations that local politicians were providing aid andprotection to the Tamil Tigers.
During the current election, the Congress Party faced abrisk challenge from a leftist coalition led by former Prime Minister V.P.Singh, who denounced what he called Congress's "culture of corruption" andadvocated divisive job set-asides for India's lower castes and religiousminorities.
An even tougher test for the Congress -- and the centristideology that has held India together for four decades -- has been mounted byHindu ultranationalists from the Bharatiya Janata Party, who denounced Gandhifor allegedly pandering to India's Muslim minority and directing too manygovernment resources to religious and caste minorities in an effort to winvotes.
Election in India: turmoil and tragedyThe Congress Party, whichhas dominated Indian politics since independence in 1947, is being challengedby a center-left coalition that wants to break down the caste system and aright-wing party that seeks a more openly Hindu, less secular India.
; ...Caste systemHierarchical ranking of social groups rooted in Hindureligious beliefs that people are born with different intellectual andspiritual qualities and capabilities.
Janata Dal: Led by former prime minister, V.P.Singh.
Part of center-left alliance challenging caste system and seeking tobuild a more equitable social structure.
Party hasgrown significantly since 1984, when it won 2 out of 542 Parliament seats.
Socialist Janata Dal: The party was formed in November with Congress Partybacking by current prime minister Chandra Shekhar, who heads interimgovernment.
; ...Sanjay Gandhi;    1946-1980Younger son of IndiraGandhi, served as her chief political adviser in the '70s, considered herpolitical heir-apparent until his death in a plane crash.
;    ...Jawaharlal Nehru;    1889 -1964India's first prime minister, 1947-1964.Associate of Mohandas Gandhi.
;    ... Mohandas K. Gandhi;    1869-1948Leader ofnationalist movement, pioneered nonviolent resistance against British rule.
; ...Sources: Dictionary of World Religions, World Book Encyclopedia, WorldFactbook 1990, Encyclopedia Brittanica, Current Biography, World Almanac 1991,New York Times, Associated Press; ..... Reported by Maggie Hirsch, graphic byJenny Anderson -- Mercury News  
