But the sun also happens to be about 400 times as far away from Earth asthe moon.
"It's maybe the greatest natural occurrence one can witness," said LarryToy, a Chabot College astronomy professor. "
"Solar eclipses occur twice a year, when the sun, moon andearth line up.
(This line-up would occur at every new moon, except that themoon's orbit is tilted so it only crosses the sun's path every six months.
But when the shadow's narrow path does crossinhabited areas, people flock there to experience "totality" -- to watch thelight snap off and the stars snap on, and to gaze at the sun's shaggy coronahanging in the dark sky for a few minutes before daylight abruptly returns.
At its peak, observers will see one of the longest-lasting eclipses thiscentury -- six minutes, 53 seconds.
Also, its 150-mile-wide path acrossHawaii, Baja California, Mexico City and four Central American capital cities"puts more people in the moon's shadow than any other eclipse in history,"says Alan Dyer, an editor of Astronomy magazine.
"It's goingto be great from up there on the mountain," said Harold Zirin, a CaliforniaInstitute of Technology astronomer who will be at one of the observatoriesatop Mauna Kea, a dormant volcano that makes up a large piece of the island ofHawaii.
Historic eventsFor science, two eclipses have proved especiallyhistoric: In 1868, spectroscopic study of the sun's halo turned up evidence ofa new element, which was named helium, from Helios, the Greek sun god.
For one thing, chasing eclipses by trekking to remoteregions with delicate astronomical instruments to capture a few minutes ofdata has lost much of its glamour, especially in times of tight budgets.
For another, some of the information now can be gathered any day of the yearby using instruments that simulate a solar eclipse.
But this time, theeclipse is coming to them, and they can't resist a look.
At 13,800 feet, MaunaKea is the world's tallest island mountain.
It's so high that oxygen deprivation is a serious concern.
And, unlike mostpeople headed for Hawaii, astronomers will be packing long underwear and downjackets in case, as sometimes happens even in July, the temperature at thesummit drops below freezing.7 observatories in useSeven of the nineobservatories atop Mauna Kea will be used Thursday morning.
Solar wind studiesAt some observatories, astronomers will take repeatedphotographs of the corona during the eclipse to study it close up and to watchfor material accelerating outward to become solar wind.
Others will usetelescopes to study the sun's emissions at microwave frequencies to learn moredetails about how its temperature varies with altitude.
But, frankly, theastronomers also want to watch the lights go out.
"Thebiggest problem," Zirin said, "is whether we're going to see the eclipse."
