The Coast Guard said the slickand patches of oil separated from it were spread over an area ofabout 100 square miles.
An Exxon spokeswoman, Sharon Curran-Wescott, said she believedCousin's actions violated federal regulations.
``He didn't have a proper pilot's license for that.
He wasn'tauthorized by the company, nor was it legal,'' she said.
``I am unaware of any explanation he has made at this time.
There is a full investigation that will occur on the incident,''Dunphy said, adding that the captain is consulting with an attorney.
Exxon Shipping Co. held ameeting Sunday between fishermen and a company claims officer.
``We're not ready to absorb any loss,'' said Riki Ott,spokeswoman for United Fishermen of Alaska.
Ten supertankers remained anchored 33 miles from Valdez, unableto move toward shore because the harbor remains closed.
Department of Interior spokeswoman Pamela Bergmann said awildlife specialist sailed in the sound Saturday and observed 75ducks and two otters coated with oil.
They could not be capturedfor cleaning, she said.
Steve Cowper declared Prince William Sound a disaster area,freeing state resources for cleanup and paving the way for afederal disaster declaration.
``This oil spill may well be the greatest disaster to hit Alaskasince the Good Friday earthquake 25 years ago,'' Cowper said in anews release.
``It requires the most thorough response we canmuster and this disaster declaration is an important part of thatresponse.
We'll be requesting President Bush to make a similardeclaration.''
The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez, carrying 1.2 million barrelsof North Slope crude oil loaded at Valdez, ran onto a reef 25 milesfrom the port early Friday after swinging out of a traffic lane toavoid ice.
More than four miles of floating boom had been placed in aneffort to contain the oil, the Coast Guard said Sunday.
However, Exxon insisted that the area was only 10 to12 square miles, and Coast Guard officials said they were at a lossto explain the difference in estimates.
The Coast Guard said about84,000 gallons of oil an hour was being transferred; at that rate,the unloading could take seven days.
Tests were under way to determine if dispersal chemicals shouldbe used despite the potential for environmental damage.
However, the wind and waves may make it more difficult to skimoil off the water, said Coast Guard Lt. Ed Wieliczkiewicz.
Environmentalists, the governor and other top state officialshave accused Exxon and Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. of respondingtoo slowly to the spill.
Alyeska operates the terminal at Valdezthat loads tankers with North Slope crude.
Both companies said they were satisfied with the handling of theproblem.
Exxon Shipping Co. President Frank Iarossi said Exxon hasreviewed information gathered by divers and determined there arefive holes in the vessel's hull on the starboard side.
All six tanks along the port side remain intact.
Hazelwood was in his cabin atthe time of the accident, Iarossi said.
The spill came at a time when Prince William Sound fishermenwere preparing for the herring season, which is followed byharvests of shellfish and salmon.
Many are concerned they will get only minimal harvests becauseof the oil damage, and then will face the longer-term problem ofbad publicity.
``This could ruin our reputation in Asian markets for years tocome,'' said Jim Brown, a netter.
The herring catch, which usually takes place in April, primarilyis for the harvest of roe, a delicacy that brings up to $25 perpound in Japan.
``It's possible they could avoid the oil,'' Brown said.
Fishermen said they have had two good years back to back, andsome were spurred by that success to go into debt for new equipmentthis year.
Ott said fishing is an economic mainstay in Cordova, more sothan in Valdez, which also draws tourists and has the oil terminal.
``Half of Cordova is operating on credit,'' Ott said.
