And overthe last 10 to 12 months it has taken a distinct turn for the worse.
The Belgian chambers in the regions most directly affected believe there aretwo main areas for development: firstly, increasing traffic through westernFlanders as holidaymakers and freight carriers head towards thetunnel-opening in Calais; and secondly tourism.
Once this is done it will be possible to drive from Russia to Englandwithout leaving a motorway, says Mr Philippe Claerhout, chairman of theVeurne chamber of commerce and industry.
Fortunately, plans to complete thestretch have been agreed and it should be open some time next year.
Worst affected will beOstend and Zeebrugge, two ports hoping to hold their own by concentrating onlinks with ports in the north of England.
Nonetheless, the improved, if imperfect, transport communications of theWest Flanders region are apparently paying off.
Mr Geert Sanders, who worksfor the Regional Development Authority of West Flanders, says there isalready evidence that the region's enhanced communications are attractingnew businesses.
For example, Baronie, a Dutch chocolate company, is openinga new base in the southern part of West Flanders.
There is, however, a danger that Belgium will not make the most of thecommercial opportunities - 'we will try to attract new industry, but ourregion is very small and our industrial zones are full,' says Mr LudoVerstraete, of the Veurne chamber of commerce.
The Belgian authorities havedragged their feet over decisions to dedicate new areas, he says.
As Mr Claerhout says: 'Weneed to convince people from other countries that it is worth their while tostop in Westhoek at the time of their journey through the North of Europe toEngland.
West Flanders is home to some of the best-knownWorld War One battlefields, and promoters of the region insist that itslarge, open green spaces will, when properly developed, attract foreignvisitors.
But once again, there is a danger that Belgium will miss out.
Around Calais, a commercial and leisure centre, hotels and activity parks,known as 'La Cite de L'Europe', are springing up while Lille is home toEuralille, a similar development.
As Mr Verstraete of the Veurne chamber ofcommerce says: 'Tourism is very important .
