Introduction: A panel that investigated the Los Angeles Police Department after officerswere videotaped beating a motorist has decided not to seek Chief Daryl Gates'resignation and neither blamed nor cleared him.
But the 10-membercommission, which was to release its report today, found racist and sexistremarks scattered throughout 90,000 pages of computer messages, sources said.
Commission membersand others who had seen the report declined comment Monday.
Mayor Tom Bradley, who has asked Gates to step down,said through a spokesman he believed the report focused on police management,excessive force and civilian control.
Sources familiar with testimony andevidence presented to the panel told the Los Angeles Times that a number ofracially derogatory messages sent on police car computer terminals have beencataloged.
One message, for which no context was provided, read: "It'smonkey slapping time.
TheAmerican Civil Liberties Union and other groups called for Gates to resignafter the March 3 incident in which white police officers repeatedly struckKing with batons, kicked him and shocked him with a stun gun after pulling himover for speeding.
It was headedby former Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
ThePolice Commission consists of five civilians appointed by the mayor.
Thechief has civil-service protection and can be removed only by the PoliceCommission for misconduct.
Geoffrey Taylor Gibbs, who sits on the board ofJohn M. Langston Bar Association, which represents about 900 African Americanlawyers, said black and Latino neighborhoods are depending on the commissionto confirm their view that the white, male-dominated Police Department hassubjected them to years of brutality and ignored their complaints.
"If they don't say this is aproblem, then all of their recommendations won't mean a thing.
"But RamonaRipston, head of the Los Angeles ACLU, said it does not matter whether thereport names Gates.
"If they find a series of things the matter with thedepartment," she said, "don't you think it's going to point a finger at Gateswhether they name him or not?"
