Introduction:   Allegations of police racism and brutalityhave shaken this city that for decades has prided itself on aprogressive attitude toward civil rights and a reputation for racialharmony.
The deaths of two blacks at a drug raid that went awry, followed10 days later by a scuffle between police and blacks at a downtownhotel, touched off an outcry by minority leaders for an outsidereview of the department.
You can only wind the watch sotightly before it's going to snap.
I think we're approaching thatbreaking point,'' said Van Hayden, 25, a student who says policebeat him at the hotel.
The city's police chief, John Laux, says there is no reason toassume the department would be immune to a problem that is presentin all segments of society.
``The whole society to different degrees has problems ofracism,'' he said.
In a letter to police supervisors in mid-February, Laux said:``Let me make one thing perfectly clear _ any act of bias will bedealt with directly and severely.
There will be no tolerance forthat type of inexcusable behavior.''
Since former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, then a35-year-old mayor running for the U.S. Senate, electrified the 1948Democratic National Convention with his historic speech in supportof civil rights, Minneapolis has been viewed as a liberal,progressive city.
``The liberal image is a false picture,'' said Chris Nisan, aUniversity of Minnesota student who has been involved in recentprotests.
``There are bad apples in every bunch and the Minneapolis PoliceDepartment is no exception,'' said Councilwoman Sayles Belton.
Lloyd Smalley, 71, and Lillian Weiss, 65, were killed Jan. 25 ina fire that started after police hurled a stun grenade into theirapartment, where others also lived, during a drug raid.
A grand jury decided not to bring charges againstany officers, but an FBI investigation is continuing.
In the hotel scuffle, police said they responsed to a call of aloud party.
Partygoers alleged that officers used the term``nigger,'' and beat some of those arrested.
Gleason Glover, president of the Minneapolis Urban League, whichworks for interracial cooperation, said police racism has been aproblem since he took over the league position 21 years ago.
I do not see a quick fix solution to it,'' Gloversaid.
Laux opposes establisment of a citizen panel tolook into police actions.
Laux said the 750-member department, which includes 62 minoritymembers and 68 white women, will begin cultural awareness trainingfor all officers, probably this fall.
``We need to get more education about ourselves and abouteveryone else.
