Introduction: With a third presidential candidateassassinated, Colombia's government refused Friday to put off nextmonth's election and vowed to keep up the fight against drugtraffickers.
The authenticity of neither claim could be verified.
Friday's telefax accused police of instigating violence in orderto force the government to continue its crackdown on traffickers,and accused the police of putting out false communiques purportedto be from the cartel.
Since then, drug traffickers have killed more than 230 people,including judges, politicians, policemen, soldiers, newspaperemployees and two other presidential candidates.
But Interior Minister Horacio Serpa told reporters Friday thatthe elections will not be postponed or canceled.
In a televisedspeech late Thursday, Serpa said the government will fightterrorists ``without rest.''
Hundreds of leftist guerrillas belonging to the M-19 rebel grouplaid down their arms last month and formed a political party withPizarro as its presidential candidate.
Government officials hadsaid Pizarro could have helped mediate peace agreements with otherleftist insurgents.
In a radio interview, he condemned the killing as anotheract by ``powerful organizations'' trying to impose an ``empire ofevil and crime.''
Gomez, suggesting that Barco does not have the confidence ofColombia's military, urged the president Friday to name a three-mancouncil to run Colombia's security forces.
The Patriotic Union's presidential candidate, BernardoJaramillo, was fatally wounded March 22 at the Bogota airport by anassassin with a machine gun.
Pizarro's killer, 25-year-old Alvaro Rodriguez, was sitting tworows behind Pizarro on the flight and apparently retrieved themachine gun from an airplane bathroom before returning to his seat,Capt.
Minutes later, he stood up, pulled the weapon from his blackleather jacket, leaned forward and fired at Pizarro's head fromabout a foot away, Munevar said.
Two men with machine guns were arrested at Barranquilla airport,a police spokesman there said.
They apparently were part of anassassination squad with orders to kill Pizarro if he survived theflight, police said.
In another development, church officials in Medellin said theyhad foiled a plan to kill Colombia's Roman Catholic prelate,Cardinal Alfonso Lopez Trujillo.
Three men disguised as police agents entered Lopez Trujillo'soffices on Wednesday and Thursday asking for the prelate, but hewas not in, said the church statement late Thursday.
