The file AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI has obtained on the investigation confirms close cooperation and coordination between Fatah-the Revolutionary Council [FRC] and Jordanian fundamentalist extremist groups sponsored by Iran.
Reports confirm that shortly after arriving in Beirut, Ahmad 'Abd-al-Karim left for the FRC's al-Rawdah camps in Western al-Biqa' from where he followed the investigation through reports sent to him by people who secretly work for the FRC and who provided him with information in exchange for generous sums of money.
At the same time, AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI has learned that the Abu- Nidal group recently sent threat letters to Lebanese officials who are currently investigating its members who are involved in the al- Ma'ayitah assassination.
Lebanese investigator, Judge Sa'id Mirza ordered the arrest of the three Palestinians and listened to the deposition of three witnesses, including 'Afaf Yusuf [not further identified] who reiterated her previous deposition.
At the time, two members of Parliament were arrested; Ya'qub Qirrish anbd Layth Shubaylat on chrages of heading the organization.
The information gathered also shows that some Jordanian fundamentalist elements moved to Iran where they received training courses in the Al-Quds camp and the Kermandi [name as transliterated] camp, and courses in intelligence work in the Darjah [name as transliterated] institute.
Iran has sponsored these organizations to establish Islamic organizations and cells in the countries that have common borders with Israel so they can take power in these countries and turn them into Islamic regimes.
Confirmed information indicates that in early 1994, IMYO elements held an important meeting in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, with officials from the FRC.
Abu-Jami' now lives in Sa'dah, Yemen, which is home to camps for Afghan and Arab fundamentalists.
The information adds that the IMYO made several decisions to attack Jordanian interests and institutions and assassinate Jordanian diplomats in a move to pressure the Jordanian regime.
Detailing this cooperation that lead to al-Ma'ayitah's assassination, the security sources note that the al-Ramlah al- Bayda' area in Beirut contained a secret headquarters for Walid Khalid, the FRC official spokesman who was assassinated in the Lebanese capital on 30 July 1992.
These meetings were conducted in the presence of an FRC official called Amjad 'Ata, a Lebanese member of Abu-Nidal group named Tha'ir, and a Jordanian IMYO official from the Idkaydik family.
The plan to assassinate al-Ma'ayitah was drafted during these meetings.
To carry out the assassination, an intensive training course was conducted for the Palestinians Bassam 'Atiyah and Yusuf 'Adwani in a secret center run by Abu-Nidal group in Buq'atah in Lebanon's al- Shuf area under the supervision of a Palestinian expert in assassinations called A. al-'Umayri [not further identified].
Al- ' Umayri was implicated in the assassination of the FRC official Bahij Abu-al-Hana in July 1992 in Lebanon's al-Biqa' area, after he accused him of contacting the 'Arafat-led Fatah movement.
Confirmed security information says a Jordanian fundamentalist took part in the assassination of al-Ma'ayitah.
The man is called Khalid al-Bishtawi, 34 years old.
The security agencies' information suggests that al-Bishtawi fled to Burj al- Barajinah camp after the crime and then moved to Cyprus where he joined Jordanian fundamentalist elements living there with Tunisian fundamentalists from the Rachid Ghanouchi-led al-Nahdah Movement.
The FRC (Abu-Nidal group) took immediate steps after al- Ma'ayitah's assassination.
It made changes within the ranks of its officials and moved some of them outside Lebanon and changed the secret apartments it owns in Beirut and the southern part of Sidon.
It is worth noting that the Jordanian intelligence service played an important role in revealing the secrets and details of al- Ma'ayitah's assassination.
Jordanian security officials traveled to Lebanon and cooperated with Lebanese officers in the investigations that led to revealing all the details and the arrest of more than 30 members of Abu-Nidal group in Jordan.
It seems that the investigations will not stop at this point in Beirut or Amman.
In an apparent attempt to prevent the revelation of further details, the leadership of the Abu-Nidal group urged King Husayn to "give it a chance to explain its position."
It also hastened to send one of its officials to Lebanon to follow the investigation and try to lessen its repercussions out of fear that al-Ma'ayitah's assassination may be one of the fatal mistakes committed by the FRC and may negatively affect the organization's future in Lebanon and Jordan.
