Introduction:just try explaining what GATT, the Uruguay Round or Blair House are allabout - but US investors have adopted a sensibly direct approach to theNorth American Free Trade Agreement: if Congress passes the treaty nextweek, it will be good for the economy, good for US companies, good for thestock markets, and good for President Clinton.
Investors believe that Nafta will liftcorporate profits because in a more open trading environment between thethree signatory countries the US, with its superior industrial productivityrates and better-quality products, will enjoy the greatest economicbenefits.
The expectation is that growth in US exports to Mexico and Canadawill outpace growth in imports from its neighbours to the north and south.
Investors are not alone in their optimistic view of Nafta.
Investors fear that a rejection of Nafta would have dangerousknock- on effects around the world, depressing share prices in the US, LatinAmerica and eventually Europe, and endangering vital trade negotiations overthe Uruguay Round.
By coincidence, the day after next week's Nafta vote,Clinton will be in Seattle for a trade conference with leaders of AsianPacific Nations.
Investors' darkest fear is that a no vote on Nafta would throw such aspanner in the works of world trade that it would lead to a new era ofinternational protectionism, higher inflation and slower world economicgrowth.
In this scenario, inflation would be the biggest concern of markets.
Thus, any reversal in that trend - a return of trade barriers, higherinflation, higher bond yields, - could undermine equity markets that arealready vulnerable to a sharp downward correction because of expensive stockvaluations.
Then there is the political cost of Nafta's failure to consider.
On paper, this should not be a particularly difficult task,because Congress is controlled by Democrats.
Because the domestic labour marketremains weak, this line has struck a strong chord with ordinary Americans.
Share prices in Mexico rose on Wednesday andThursday, and US stocks made solid gains, following the televised debate onTuesday between Vice-President Al Gore and Ross Perot, who is Nafta's mostcelebrated opponent.
Gore clearly bested Perot in a heated war of words, and polls taken over thenext few days revealed that more Americans had been won over to Nafta.
Whether this helped swing the votes of some anti-Nafta legislators theClinton administration's way remains to be seem.
Nafta is playing on investors' minds because doubts over its passage throughCongress have arisen at a vulnerable time for stock and bond prices.
A weekago bond yields jumped amid worries that resurgent economic growth mightrekindle inflation.
Although data released this week on producer andconsumer prices showed that fears of rising inflation are, at least for now,unjustified, equity investors remain nervous about rising bond yields.
