Introduction:MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Friday nights used to be slow at TheFault Line, a nightclub here on busy Poplar Avenue.
But even as Memphians whoop it up, the prediction that theBig One may come in December is triggering tremors up anddown the Mississippi Valley.
Shaken, thousands of people arecrowding into earthquake survival classes.
"You can't run fromeverything," says Tammy McCormick, a nurse in Blytheville,Ark.
, who will take her two youngsters and spend several dayswith relatives in North Carolina. "
Researchers estimatethose earthquakes ranked stronger than 8 on the RichterScale, which hadn't been invented yet.
And as tons of soil and rock bed pitched androlled in a seismic frenzy, new waterfalls spiked up, causingpart of the mighty Mississippi River to flow backward forseveral hours.
The New Madrid (pronounced MAD-rid) fault still has 150small, mostly unfelt, earthquakes a year.
"We're overdue for one inthe 6s and low 7s," says David Stewart, an earthquake expertat Southeast Missouri State University.
New Madrid, Mo., thefault's namesake, draws tourists to a museum with exhibits onthe 19th century devastation.
And Paragould, Ark., has heldearthquake festivals with events like the "Miss Faultless"beauty contest.
But as Monday, Dec. 3, approaches, the whole matter isbecoming more serious.
That's because the predictor hasgained credibility in some important circles for his work onthe climate.
And he predicted "geological danger" on Sept. 19,1985, along a band of latitude that included Mexico City --where a massive quake struck on that day.
He has clients, such as PaineWebber Inc., who have long paidfor his wisdom on how the weather will affect theiragricultural investments.
Since 1971, Mr. Browning says, he has picked the correctdates of four large earthquakes, two volcanoes -- and one daywith both a volcano and an earthquake.
He bases his forecasts on tidal forces caused by thepositions of the sun and the moon -- an old theory, criticssay, that doesn't wash. On Dec. 3, those forces are expectedto be at a 27-year high.
"No responsible scientist can predictan exact day for an earthquake," says Brian Mitchell, a quakeexpert at St. Louis University, echoing the majority opinion.
But Mr. Browning shouldn't be written off so quickly, saysSoutheast Missouri State's Mr. Stewart, who recently spentfour days with Mr. Browning. "
Browning says it's not easy being on record withpredictions that few other scientists will support.
If one is a business consultant,they don't pay you for being wrong.
"Plenty of other business people are cashing in on hisprediction.
Insurance salespeople are peddling earthquakecoverage to homeowners and businesses.
Salespeople from aMemphis company pop up at survival seminars with a device(for $259 and up) that turns off gas lines when a quake hits.
"All of this has changed life in places like Blytheville,Ark.
(pop: 24,314), tucked amid vast flat farmland, right atthe corner of the Arkansas, Tennessee and Missouri borders.
So many people plan to skip town on Dec. 3 that theFlexible Technologies tubing plant already plans to shut downfor two days, at a cost of thousands of dollars.
Says JimmyConnell, plant superintendent, "It's going to be a ghost townaround here.
For fiveyears, most of his classes were lightly attended.
Now hisphone-answering machine says he is almost completely bookedthrough October.
It is 9 a.m.on a rainy Saturday, and 325 Osceolans, gripping legal padsand spiral notebooks, fill the high school auditorium for anall-day session on earthquake preparedness.
Andall the federal emergency help is going to go there and St. Louis.
"After the seminar, two elderly sisters, both widows, spliton what to do.
Fearing their home will be looted, Bess Mann,86 years old, wants to ride it out.
But her sister, HalliePeterson, 83, wants to stay with their nephew in Mississippi.
Scared that the big Memphis-Arkansas bridge that spans theMississippi River will collapse in a quake, she's charting analternate route two hours out of her way.
School districts in Earle and Wilson, Ark., have announcedclosings around Dec. 3.
Some schools practice earthquakedrills, while others sponsor cake sales to buy survival kitsfor classrooms, with items like blankets, flashlights andradios.
In 11 years of studying predictionmethods, the panel has found no bona fide approach.
"But this one," says Randall Updike, the executivesecretary, "has created such chaos in the mid-continentregion that we felt we had to give our advice."Mr.
