The biggest oil spill in U.S. history created a slick aboutseven miles long and seven miles wide in Prince William Sound.
``This situation, I think, was everyone's secret nightmare aboutwhat could happen with oil traffic in the sound,'' said DennisKelso, commissioner of the Alaska Department of EnvironmentalConservation.
Some 240,000 barrels _ about 10,080,000 gallons _ of crude oilfrom Alaska's North Slope spilled early Friday when the 987-foottanker Exxon Valdez ran hard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 milesoutside Valdez, where it had taken on a total cargo of 1.2 millionbarrels.
``What we have here is a major environmental catastrophe,'' saidone oil spill expert, Richard Golob of Boston, publisher of GolobOil Pollution Bulletin.
Golob said cleanup equipment at the site was ``grosslyinadequate'' but added that even under ideal circumstances cleanupefforts would not have significantly reduced the spill's impact.
``It is an enclosed body of water,'' he said.
``And during that transit, undoubtedly a large stretch ofshoreline will be contaminated,'' he said.
Divers Saturday said they had found six to eight holes in thevessel's hull large enough to swim through, said Frank Iarossi,president of Exxon Shipping Co. About 30 feet of the vessel isresting on a shelf on the reef.
Efforts to begin pumping 200,000 gallons of oil off the ExxonValdez onto another tanker, the Exxon Baton Rouge, were haltedearly Saturday when authorities noticed that oil appeared toleaking as the pumping operation proceeded.
``Whenever you start removing oil from a vessel this size it hasto be done in a controlled manner,'' Wieliczkiewicz said.
``The initial reponse was inadequate and unacceptable,'' he saidbefore a news conference Saturday.
Kelso said the efforts shouldhave been under way in five hours, but took much longer.
It took several hours longer,he said, and only two of seven skimmers available to the AlyeskaPipeline Service Co. were used at the outset.
Alyeska spokesman Chuck O'Donnel said he was satisfied with hiscompany's actions.
``I think our people did an excellent job,'' hesaid.
The spill's effect on wildlife had not yet been assessed, butcommercial fishermen who depend on the sound for a catch worthmillions of dollars were outraged and said a key herring spawningarea had been polluted.
``There's a high concentration of sea otter, waterfowl, seabirds and pink salmon in that area,'' said Steve Goldstein, aspokesman for the Interior Department in Washington.
Whales, porpoises and seals are also common in Prince WilliamSound.
An animal cleanup station was set up in a building at thecommunity college in Valdez, but volunteers there said they had noanimals to work on by midafternoon.
``We feel that this should have been the easiest oil spill inthe world to clean up,'' said Riki Ott, chairman of theorganization's habitat committee.
Ott said the spill had polluted Prince William Sound's primaryherring spawning area.
Fishermen also take salmon and shellfishfrom the sound.
Last year, they were paid about $85 million fortheir catches, she said.
The Port of Valdez remained closed to tanker traffic.
NorthSlope crude oil is shipped 800 miles through the trans-Alaska oilpipeline from Prudhoe Bay south to Valdez for shipment aboardtankers to refineries outside Alaska.
The vessel's captain, Joseph Hazelwood, has worked for Exxon for20 years, at least 10 as a ship's master.
There was no decision Saturday on whether to use chemicals todisperse the oil, but a test of the dispersal method was beingconducted Saturday afternoon, as was a test to determine whether atleast some of the crude oil could be burned.
McCall said the tests routinely areadministered in marine accidents involving federal jurisdiction.
Up to 10.7 million gallons of oil was lost on Nov. 1, 1979, whenthe tanker Burmah Agate collided with another ship in GalvestonBay, Texas.
