Introduction:"Mad cow disease" has killed 10,000 cattle, restricted the export market for Britain's cattle industry and raised fears about the safety of eating beef.
"I think everyone agrees that the risks are low," says Martin Raff, a neurobiologist at University College, London.
The incurable disease eats holes in the brains of its victims; in late stages a sick animal may act skittish or stagger drunkenly.
The suspicion is that the disease was transmitted through cattle feed, which used to contain sheep by-products as a protein supplement.
The government banned the use of sheep offal in cattle feed in June, 1988, and later banned the use of cattle brain, spleen, thymus, intestines and spinal cord in food for humans.
Sheep offal is still used in pig and poultry feed.
In March, the government announced that it would pay farmers 100% of market value or average market price, whichever is less, for each animal diagnosed with BSE.
"I think it is a recognition -- not just of pressure from farmers -- but that the public would feel more confident that no BSE-infected animal would ever be likely to go anywhere near the food chain if there was 100% compensation," said Sir Simon Gourlay, president of the National Farmers Union.
The disease struck one of his own cows, Gourlay said.
As of Feb. 9, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food said that 9,998 cattle have been destroyed after being diagnosed with BSE.
Because of the disease, the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service in July banned imports of cattle, embryos and bull semen from Britain, said Margaret Webb, a USDA spokeswoman in Washington.
Similar embargoes have been imposed by Australia, Finland, Israel, Sweden, West Germany and New Zealand, according to the Agriculture Ministry, and the European Community has proposed a ban on exports of British cattle older than 6 months.
A commission chaired by Sir Richard Southwood, a professor at Oxford University, reported last year that the cause of BSE "is quite unlike any bacteria or known viruses."
There is a human variant of spongiform encephalopathy, known as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
About two dozen cases were reported in Britain last year.
The committee's report, released early this year, said it is only a "shrewd guess" that BSE is transmitted through sheep offal in cattle feed.
