Terry D. Barnes, 24, was shot between the eyes in his apartment.
Police said an officer investigating a report of a prowler hadentered the apartment at 3:30 a.m. and fired after Barnes got outof bed to see what was wrong.
It was the seventh shooting death involving Kansas City policeofficers this year.
In the previous three years, five people wereshot and killed.
``I just hope that this case will draw the line on where thepolice can kill an innocent man.
saidroommate Andy Brez, 23, who was sleeping in another bedroom whenpolice entered on Saturday.
Barnes was white, as is the officer who shot him; however, otherrecent incidents of alleged excessive force involved blackcitizens.
Police said they were told the prowler might have run to thefloor on which Barnes lived.
Two police officers, whose names werenot disclosed, noticed the door to his apartment was not tightlyshut and entered, authorities said.
Barnes made ``a kind of lunging motion,'' and the officerfired from about 5 to 8 feet, Mills said.
``We are defending the officers being in that apartment,'' Millssaid.
``We're part of the problem out there on the street, and we'vegot to get back to good, basic police work,'' Bishop said afterBarnes' death.
In June, several white officers bloodied a Nigerian-born RomanCatholic priest with nightsticks as he lay on the ground.
Joseph Okoye said officers who stopped him on suspicion of drunkendriving mistook his foreign accent for drunken speech.
Neither clergyman nor the passenger in Fountaine's car wascharged.
Both clergymen alleged racism; Bishop suspended some ofthe officers involved in the May incident.
In another case, three undercover officers were suspended for ashooting this spring that left a young black man crippled.
Also this year, four oficers riddled a man brandishing abarbecue fork with 15 bullets, killing him.
And an officer killed aman who was spraying him with a fire extinguisher.
He would have been a good husband and agood father,'' said Barnes' fiancee, Alison Brady.
