What he foreseesis a body blow to world poverty through bootstrap economics.
John Hatch says he hit upon his Third World``poverty vaccination'' while panic-stricken on a flight to Bolivia.
``And on my second double bourbon at 35,000 feet up flying overthe Andes, I have to say it was like this thought just rolledthrough my body,'' Hatch recalls.
The series of loans, starting at $50, is renewable over threeyears to a ceiling of $300, allowing recipients to reach a level atwhich they can qualify for commercial credit.
What Hatch envisioned on that plane five years ago hastranslated into 400 village banks in nine countries with more than35,000 members.
Village banks are operating in Mexico, Haiti,Thailand, Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica, Bolivia, Peru and ElSalvador.
What Hatch foresees is a body blow to world poverty throughbootstrap economics.
Hatch, a one-time Peace Corps volunteer with a doctorate ineconomic development, is founder and president of the non-profitFoundation for International Community Assistance, which recentlymoved its headquarters from Tucson to Alexandria, Va.
There is ``almost a 100 percent guarantee'' that increasedincome for women will go into improvements in their children'swelfare, Hatch says.
``We teach severely poor mothers how to create their ownself-managed bank, which provides them with self-employment loans,provides them with savings incentives and provides them with asupport group of mothers like themselves, so that they are allattacking change at the same time.''
Lawrence Yanovitch, small enterprise development programcoordinator for Catholic Relief Services in Baltimore, Md., says,``John Hatch is close to the voice of the poor.
Catholic Relief Services entered a five-year, $1 million jointventure a year ago with the U.S. Agency for InternationalDevelopment and the foundation to create 40 village banks inThailand.
They targeted microenterprise development through smallentrepreneurs, vendors, village market women, who in somedeveloping countries comprise up to 50 percent of the employment.
Capitalization for one bank typically will cost a sponsoringagency $5,000.
Beryl Rupp, a Rotary Club official in Phoenix, says the bankmembers buy necessities with their profits or savings: a chair tosit on, pots to cook in, blankets, better food.
``They say things like, `Now I'm somebody,' or `My husbandrespects me more.'''
Their vehicle for improvement is the village bank, eachcomprised of 30 to 50 women who, through loans starting at $50, canearn enough to provide savings and create capital.
Hatch says theloans give them freedom to start their own investment projects inor near home.
``We want to know who the most powerful woman is in thatvillage.''
It might beselling produce, groceries, baked goods, raising chickens, sewingor craftwork.
Each woman signs her name or provides a thumbprint ascollateral, agreeing to repay one-sixteenth of the loan weekly,plus interest of 1 percent to 3 percent, in line with local banks.
In some countries, the repayment rate has been 100 percent.
``Fifty percent or more are illiterate, and I would say 90percent of them don't have any idea of what they're getting intowhen we start out,'' says Hatch.
Women who join the bank screen members and elect their leadersfrom first-meeting attendees.
The United Nations has provided a $50,000 grant to research theeffects of women's empowerment through village banking on maternaland child health practices.
Rotary Club 100, a Phoenix organization, and a Rotary Club ofMexico City are in a joint venture, having funded five villagebanks in Guaymas, Mexico, with another four to be launched in theslums of Mexico City.
Hatch says he believes village banking has a role to play inreducing poverty along the Mexican border and in slowing downmigration to this country.
