According to Mr Anthony VandeCandelare, an urban planner who made a study of the influence of the ChannelTunnel on the west of Belgium and the North of France: 'Overnight, theBelgian coast and the North of France will become the centre of Europe.
There is, however, a danger that Belgium will not make the most of thecommercial opportunities - 'we will try to attract new industry, but ourregion is very small and our industrial zones are full,' says Mr LudoVerstraete, of the Veurne chamber of commerce.
'With the TGV and the chunnel this region, which was sort of in the cornerof Europe, will now be in the middle of a new developing area,' he says.
West Flanders is home to some of the best-knownWorld War One battlefields, and promoters of the region insist that itslarge, open green spaces will, when properly developed, attract foreignvisitors.
The chambers of commerce in Veurne and Courtrai, along with the WestFlanders Regional Development Authority in Bruges, are gearing up to becomepart of what they refer to as the 'new European Metropolitan Area.
Introduction:
The official opening of the Channel Tunnel later this year promises to helprevitalise the north-west regions of Belgium, even though the country'sbiggest ports will suffer a loss of traffic.
'Mr Jo Libeer, managing director of the Courtrai chamber of commerce, isequally optimistic about the likely impact on the area of the tunnel.
'Even after the doubling of the tracks and electrification of the railwayline between Ghent and De Panne, we will still be a remote corner,' says MrClaerhout.
'Furthermore, Flanders, the area most likely to benefit from the arrival ofthe tunnel, has recently suffered more rapid increases in unemployment thanin Wallonia and the Brussels region.
Around Calais, a commercial and leisure centre, hotels and activity parks,known as 'La Cite de L'Europe', are springing up while Lille is home toEuralille, a similar development.
'This takes in the Nord-Pas de Calais in France, Western Flanders and Hainautin Belgium, and Kent in the UK.The potential for this region is enormous.
Once this is done it will be possible to drive from Russia to Englandwithout leaving a motorway, says Mr Philippe Claerhout, chairman of theVeurne chamber of commerce and industry.
Mr Geert Sanders, who worksfor the Regional Development Authority of West Flanders, says there isalready evidence that the region's enhanced communications are attractingnew businesses.
For example, Baronie, a Dutch chocolate company, is openinga new base in the southern part of West Flanders.
The Belgian chambers in the regions most directly affected believe there aretwo main areas for development: firstly, increasing traffic through westernFlanders as holidaymakers and freight carriers head towards thetunnel-opening in Calais; and secondly tourism.
