David Osborne, who became sort of aguru for neo-liberals with his book "Laboratories ofDemocracy," speaks for many reform-minded liberals when hesays, "Term limits are necessary to shake things up anddisrupt the careerist mindset that leads to so much cowardicein elected officials.
Indeed, the Democratic Party couldactually be helped by term limits, according to formerOklahoma state legislator Cleta Mitchell, a self-described"liberal feminist" who works with the Denver-based term limitgroup Americans Back in Charge.
"While Speaker Tom Foley reacts to term limits the way thatLinus in the comic strip "Peanuts" would if his securityblanket were taken away, some House Democrats think hisconcern that term limits would result in large GOP gains inCongress is a fantasy.
However, he concludes "it would be a cost worth paying to berid of the much larger number of time-servers who havelearned nothing from longevity in office except cynicism,complacency and a sense of diminished possibility."
Other Texas Democrats who have joinedhim include Frances "Sissy" Farenthold, who cochaired GeorgeMcGovern's 1972 national campaign, and Leonel Castillo, JimmyCarter's director of the Immigration and NaturalizationService.
Ron Brown, chairman of theDemocratic National Committee, says "term limits are abackhanded attempt by Republicans to get rid of Democratsthey can't defeat at the polls."
Amongthose who have, and who will never be accused of beingcard-carrying Republicans, are: Washington Post columnistRichard Cohen, syndicated columnist Richard Reeves, theNational Journal's Neal Peirce and Time magazine's MichaelKramer.
"Breaking the gridlock of incumbency could throw the doorsopen to new people and new ideas that would make politicsrewarding, meaningful and fun," says Ms. Kunin.
""Incumbency is the glass ceiling of American politics,"says Kay Slaughter, the Democratic candidate in a specialU.S.
Butthere are already signs that business lobbies, labor unionsand other term limit opponents are relying more on convincingjudges -- starting with Florida's heavily politicized stateSupreme Court -- to overturn state term limits than on tryingto convince voters to reject the idea.
"People who say term limits are aRepublican plot to oust incumbents should know that amajority of open seats are won by Democrats," says Rep. AndyJacobs of Indiana.
Shirley Chisholm, who in 1972 was the first black to runfor a majorparty presidential nomination, says "longtermincumbency is a big reason that Congress no longer works andisn't representative.
The leading anti-termlimit group, Let the People Decide, has closed itsWashington, D.C., offices and been reduced to a skeletonstaff.
WCVB-TV, the ABC affiliate in Boston,has often had its liberal editorials called "the Boston Globeof the airwaves."
Last month,the station made a highly unusual about-face and endorsedterm limits for Congress: "We're not going to get{leadership} till we have a massive infusion of new blood.
Neo-liberals, who believe that centralized bureaucraciesare the biggest obstacle to reforming government, are alsowarming to term limits.
Brown says arguments that legislative staff and theunelected bureaucracy would gain power under term limits aresimply proof that "we must curb the excessive power of thosepolitical players as well."
Certainly the polls show that term limits areoverwhelmingly popular with Americans regardless of income,party, race or sex.
In April, it denounced term limits as "thelatest anti-government fad to sweep the country."
Last year, as head of the CaliforniaDemocratic Party he refused to sign a party slate maileragainst term limits.
Hendrik Hertzberg, a former speechwriter for Jimmy Carterwho edited the New Republic until last month, agrees termlimits would mean a loss of some distinguished legislators.
Today, former California Governor Jerry Brown saysadvocacy of term limits is a key element in his populistpresidential campaign against a "constipated" politicalsystem. "
ColumnistEllen Goodman says "We have to learn once again that idealpublic service is, by definition, temporary."
Introduction:
House Speaker Tom Foley charges that most of the supportfor the term limit proposal in Washington state came from"extreme right-wing activists."
The liberal Seattle Times,Washington state's largest newspaper, stunned its readers byendorsing term limits.
Most ofthe authors of Washington state's term limit are liberalDemocrats who want to break up "the old-boy network."
"The systemneeds a kick in the rear," says Mr. Lamm.
"While many prominent Democrats support term limits, party"apparatchiks" are dead set against them.
"Among Democratic Party activists, James Calaway of Texasis typical of those who now favor term limits.
