Previously, the largest U.S. tanker spill was the Dec. 15, 1976,grounding of the Argo Merchant tanker off the Nantucket shoals offMassachusetts, in which 7.6 million gallons of oil spilled, Golobsaid.
There was no decision Saturday on whether to use chemicals todisperse the oil, but a test of the dispersal method was beingconducted Saturday afternoon, as was a test to determine whether atleast some of the crude oil could be burned.
``This situation, I think, was everyone's secret nightmare aboutwhat could happen with oil traffic in the sound,'' said DennisKelso, commissioner of the Alaska Department of EnvironmentalConservation.
He also said four members of the Coast Guard's Pacific StrikeTeam from San Francisco, specially trained to deal with pollutionand oil spills, arrived Saturday and were helping to rig pumps andassemble equipment needed to transfer oil to the Baton Rouge.
Divers Saturday said they had found six to eight holes in thevessel's hull large enough to swim through, said Frank Iarossi,president of Exxon Shipping Co.
About 30 feet of the vessel isresting on a shelf on the reef.
Eleven of 17 tanks that lie forward of the ship's masthead wereruptured in the accident, causing concern over removal of the oil,said Coast Guard Lt.
Ed Wieliczkiewicz.
``There's a high concentration of sea otter, waterfowl, seabirds and pink salmon in that area,'' said Steve Goldstein, aspokesman for the Interior Department in Washington.
Efforts to begin pumping 200,000 gallons of oil off the ExxonValdez onto another tanker, the Exxon Baton Rouge, were haltedearly Saturday when authorities noticed that oil appeared toleaking as the pumping operation proceeded.
``The whole food chain could be affected by the spill,'' saidAlan Reichman, ocean ecology coordinator for the environmentalgroup Greenpeace, in Seattle.
The largest tanker spill in history resulted from the July 19,1979, collision off Tobago of the supertankers Atlantic Empress andAegean Captain, in which 300,000 tons _ more than 80 milliongallons _ of oil was lost.
``Some birdshave already died, and we are doing our best to try to save thefish by containing the oil to the area where it presently is and bytrying to skim it.''
``It's kind of like sailing through a zoo,'' said JimLethcoe, who lives on a boat in the sound and operates a sailingbusiness.
The spill's effect on wildlife had not yet been assessed, butcommercial fishermen who depend on the sound for a catch worthmillions of dollars were outraged and said a key herring spawningarea had been polluted.
``The only way forthis oil to ecape out to the sea is by traversing the entire lengthof Prince William Sound with all its islands, fjords and bays andchannels.
Some 240,000 barrels _ about 10,080,000 gallons _ of crude oilfrom Alaska's North Slope spilled early Friday when the 987-foottanker Exxon Valdez ran hard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 milesoutside Valdez, where it had taken on a total cargo of 1.2 millionbarrels.
It took several hours longer,he said, and only two of seven skimmers available to the AlyeskaPipeline Service Co. were used at the outset.
``We feel that this should have been the easiest oil spill inthe world to clean up,'' said Riki Ott, chairman of theorganization's habitat committee.
Wieliczkiewicz said a boom was placed around the Exxon Valdezand the Exxon Baton Rouge to help contain oil around the vessels.
``What we have here is a major environmental catastrophe,'' saidone oil spill expert, Richard Golob of Boston, publisher of GolobOil Pollution Bulletin.
The vessel's captain, Joseph Hazelwood, has worked for Exxon for20 years, at least 10 as a ship's master.
She noted that the spill hadoccurred in a protected area close to the Valdez marine terminaland the water was calm.
Up to 10.7 million gallons of oil was lost on Nov. 1, 1979, whenthe tanker Burmah Agate collided with another ship in GalvestonBay, Texas.
Introduction:   Millions of gallons of crude oil thatspilled when a tanker ran aground spread across a wildlife-richstretch of ocean Saturday, and Alaska's chief environmental officercriticized cleanup efforts as too slow.
The Coast Guard said the Exxon Valdez struck the reef when itmaneuvered outside normal tanker traffic lanes to avoid icebergs.
The response to the spill also drew fire from the 12,000-memberUnited Fishermen of Alaska.
Golob said cleanup equipment at the site was ``grosslyinadequate'' but added that even under ideal circumstances cleanupefforts would not have significantly reduced the spill's impact.
An animal cleanup station was set up in a building at thecommunity college in Valdez, but volunteers there said they had noanimals to work on by midafternoon.
TheCoast Guard said only Reef Island and the western edge of BlighIsland had been touched by the slick.
He said one or more blood-alcohol tests were administered afterthe grounding, but he said he didn't know know how many people weretested or the results.
