Virginia's version, latercopied by New York and North Carolina, brought together threeelements in one article -- affirmation of a right to beararms, reliance on state militia, and opposition to a standingarmy:"That the people have a right to keep and bear arms; thata well-regulated militia, composed of the body of the peopletrained to arms, is the proper, natural, and safe defense ofa free state; that standing armies, in times of peace, aredangerous to liberty, and therefore ought to be avoided.
"Certain explanations were lost or buried in thislegislative process: that the right to bear arms meant theright to serve in the militia; that just about everybody wasincluded in the militia; and that the amendment as a wholesought to minimize if not eliminate reliance on a standingarmy by emphasizing the role of the state militia, whichwould require that everyone be ready to be called to serve.
"Two significant changes had been made: first, the phrase"to render military service in person" was replaced by thephrase "to bear arms," again indicating that they are twoways to say the same thing; second, an explanation was added,that the "militia" is "composed of the body of the people.
This militia amendment was referred to a congressionalcommittee, and came out of committee in this form:"A well regulated militia, composed of the body of thepeople, being the best security of a free state, the right ofthe people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; butno person religiously scrupulous shall be compelled to beararms.
The Senate in turngave it its final form, briefer, unfortunately moreelliptical, and with the exemption for conscientiousobjectors deleted:"A well-regulated militia, being necessary to the securityof a free state, the right of the people to keep and beararms, shall not be infringed.
"The House then debated this new version in committee ofthe whole and, surprisingly, considering the subsequenthistory of the provision, never once did any member mentionthe private uses of arms, for self-protection, or hunting, orany other personal purpose.
What does this mean for the question of gun control today?Well, for example, it means that Congress has theconstitutional power to enact a Militia Act of 1992, torequire every person who owns a gun or aspires to own one to"enroll" in the militia.
"The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall notbe infringed, a well armed and well regulated militia beingthe best security of a free country, but no personreligiously scrupulous of bearing arms shall be compelled torender military service in person.
The best clues to the meaning of the key words and phrasesare in debates in the First Congress of the United States.
Call in the militia, which is, afterall, "composed of the body of the people.
..
"The purpose was to limit the power of the new Congress toestablish a standing army, and instead to rely on statemilitias under command of governors.
Soon after the First Congress met, James Madison, electedas a congressman from Virginia on the basis of such a pledge,proposed a number of amendments resembling yet different fromarticles proposed by states.
"Every free able-bodied white male citizen" (it was 1792,after all) was required by the act to "enroll" in the militiafor training and active service in case of need.
Requiring every gun owner to register with the NationalGuard (as we require 18-year-olds to register with theSelective Service) would provide the information about gunowners sought by the Brady and Staggers bills, and much more.
Introduction:Congress has been dismayingly inconsistent in its votingon gun-control legislation this year, first passing the BradyBill, then moving in the opposite direction by defeating aprovision to ban certain assault weapons and ammunition.
In the version of the arms amendment he presented,Madison dropped mention of a standing army and added aconscientious objector clause.
The right to bear arms protected in the Second Amendmenthas to do directly with "a well-regulated militia."
The right of the people to serve in the militia.
But what about the private right "to keep and bear arms,"to own a gun for self-defense and hunting?
Yes, ofcourse, it would go without saying, especially then whenthere were no organized police forces and when hunting wasessential to the food supply.
But the aspect that was raised to the levelof constitutional concern was the public interest in thosearms.
"In this version, "bearing arms" must mean "to rendermilitary service," or why else would there have to be anexemption for religious reasons?
The Members of that Congress were the authors of the SecondAmendment.
