The meeting point was just over 13{ miles southeast ofShakespeare Cliff, the British terminus near the town of Dover, and10 miles northwest of the French town of Sangatte, near Calais.
Management sources at TransManche Link, the constructionconsortium building the ``Chunnel'' - the Channel Tunnel
-confirmed the historic linkup occurred about 8:25 p.m. when Britishworkers sent the probe through to French colleagues.
The threading of the probes through 100 yards of chalk under theEnglish Channel marks a major turning point in three years ofdrilling on the world's costliest tunnel.
President Francois Mitterrand and Mrs. Thatcher are expected tomeet each other in the tunnel Jan. 26, after the digging for muchof the tunnel is finished.
That time is comparable to flying, if transport to and fromairports is included, and is half the time of a car-ferry journey.
Officials estimate the tunnel may carry 28 million passengers inthe first year of operation, although Eurotunnel doesn't expect aprofit until the end of the century.
Taking into account all the tunnels, 80 percent of the drillinghas been completed by giant, Japanese-built boring machines workingfrom Calais and Folkstone, England.
The conservative Daily Express newspaper noted in its Wednesdayeditions that Britons would theoretically be able to walk to Francefor the first time since the last Ice Age.
The cost of the project has soared from an initial estimate of$9.4 billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion forunforeseen cost overruns.
The basic goal of the Channel Tunnel project is to enablepassengers to travel between London and Paris in about three hours.
Another day will be needed to be certain, technicianssaid, but they called the line-up ``exceptional,'' considering themassive boring machines are drilling holes about three storieshigh.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' said a construction unionofficial.
It's the first time we have airpassing between the two tunnels,'' said Gordon Crighton, tunnelengineering manager.
The linkup fulfills a dream by Napoleon in 1802, who thought hecould defeat the English by connecting Britain to Europe with aland passage.
Since construction began in late 1987, there have been sevendeaths on the British side and two on the French.
The Chunnel's scheduled debut in mid-1993 would come six monthsafter the 12-nation European Community formally drops remainingtrade barriers, becoming a unified marketplace of 320 millionconsumers.
Tuesday's linkup in the service tunnel is described by theFrench as a ``mouse ole'' - a bore only two inches in diameter.
Eurotunnel PLC, the world's largest engineering project,announced Oct. 8 that it had reached an agreement with its banks on$3.5
billion in new credit.
Eight workers suffered injuries, two seriously, about 90 minuteslater when a tractor towing supplies rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
A work slowdown since last week by militant tunnelers
demandingmore pay on the French side appeared likely Monday to stall thelinkup until the weekend or beyond.
The workers will now bore out a one-yard hole to permit passagefrom one half to the other.
A study released last Friday in Paris by transportation expertssaid the tunnel's completion will aggravate traffic congestion in awide area of continental Europe.
The tunnel starts a few miles inland on each side, accountingfor its total length of 31 miles.
Some Britons have worries of a different sort, fearing an influxof ills from the continent ranging from terrorism to rabid animals.
