After the shooting of candidate Carlos Pizarro in a jetlinerThursday, the country's largest newspaper implored the governmentto ``do something, for the love of God.''
Addressing President Virgilio Barco, the El Tiempo editorialsaid: ``In your hands, and only in your hands, is the power toavoid the country's dissolution.''
``The gravest aspect of Colombia's bloodletting is that thegovernment has no idea how to even slow it,'' said a member of aregional human rights committee based in Medellin, the cocainecapital.
Bombings by the Medellin cartel have caused millions of dollarsin property damage, led to the militarization of Medellin and othercities and shattered the nerves of citizens.
Barco, of the Liberal Party, rejected Gomez's suggestion of atriumvirate, saying the armed forces would be reorganized only ifnecessary.
In recent interviews, Pizarro, the candidate for the leftistApril 19 Movement, or M-19, admitted he was afraid.
Traffickers have carried out a terrorist campaign that haskilled nearly 300 Colombians in the past nine months in an effortto halt the government's campaign to capture and extradite drugbarons to the United States.
One of the country's presidential candidates, Alvaro Gomez, saidFriday that Barco should name a three-man council to run Colombia'ssecurity forces to avoid a military coup.
Sen. Luis Carlos Galan ofthe ruling Liberal Party was gunned down last August at a politicalrally in Bogota, and Bernardo Jaramillo of the leftist PatrioticUnion Party was killed last month at the Bogota airport.
``Never has there been such a great and pathetic image ofanarchy,'' said Gomez, a presidential candidate of the ConservativeParty.
The media, citing security sources, reported that traffickerswere the main suspects in Pizarro's killing as well.
The unit achieved its greatest success against drug traffickerswhen it killed a Medellin cartel leader, Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha,in a gunfight last December.
Continuing to focus on a military solution to Colombia'sproblems, Barco said late Friday he would double the size of a3,000-man anti-terrorist police unit.
For the first time, leading politicians suggested the governmentitself might be compromised by the killing.
Introduction:   Less than a month before elections, theassassination of a third presidential candidate has pushed Colombiato the brink of political chaos.
Through such reforms they hope to reform the corrupted Congress,strengthen the judicial system and provide more politicalrepresentation for minority parties.
Lopez, of the Liberal Party, was president from 1974 to 1978.
