The fire, which began Saturday, wasdeclared contained this morning,   ``We have evidence confirming that it was a bottle rocket,''said Mary Hale, a spokeswoman for the California Department ofForestry.
Phil Jaquith, Beartooth District ranger for the Custer NationalForest, said the bulk of the fire on the east banks of theStillwater River was not being suppressed.
A four-day fire in 1,100 acres of Hiawatha National Park in theUpper Peninsula of Michigan was also said to be under control,although continued hot dry weather could mean weeks before the fireis extinguished.
Three-quarters of an inch of rain on Monday helped slow a fireon 1,650 acres in the Shoshone National Forest in Wyoming, and rainalso damped fires in Yellowstone National Park.
Cooler temperatures and calmer wind played a role in getting theblaze contained on the west riverbank, which is about two milesfrom the trail, Jaquith said.
In southern Utah's scenic Zion National Park, firefighters triedtoday to contain a 600-acre fire that was ignited by lightning June19 but had been allowed to burn in a small area.
Meanwhile, a fire which burned 8,700 acres in the Tonto NationalForest north of Phoenix, Ariz., was reported extinguished on Monday.
Firefighters concentrated on keeping the fire entering the Du NoirSpecial Management Area a few miles to the north, Damron said.
A small contingent of firefighters who hiked into theAbsaroka-Beartooth Wilderness on Monday in south-central Montanacontained portions of a 2,000-acre fire that has been burning theresince June 19, forest officials said.
Introduction:   Firefighters in California, Michigan, Montana, Wyoming and Utahbattled holiday weekend fires which blackened more than 6,000 acresof forest and wilderness areas.
However, on Sunday, winds ranging from 30 mph to 60 mph fannedthe flames out of control, Chief Ranger Bob Andrew said.
Fire information officer
Dave Damron said water was also beingpumped out of bogs in the Shoshone forest to help contain the fire.
The firefighters were called in to stop the flames as theyneared the Stillwater River Trail inside the wilderness area.
