Madison, a town of about 3,500 people, is the county seat ofMadison County, a thinly populated tobacco growing area of pineywoods, rolling hills and swamps on the border with Georgia.
More than one inch of rain fell in one hour this morning inWaycross, Ga., 70 miles northeast of here, and wind gusts of 40 mphwere reported in Valdosta, according to the National WeatherService.
Introduction:
A tornado blasted through this NorthFlorida town before dawn today, destroying several homes and acollege library, blowing off rooftops, flipping cars and leavingfour people dead and 15 injured, officials said.
The twister's destructive path started in front of a shoppingcenter and then proceeded straight into North Florida JuniorCollege, where it ``totaled the new library and took the roof offthe auditorium,'' Peavy said.
The tornado touched down at 4:30 a.m. just west of Madison,about 50 miles east of Tallahassee, and cut a 12-mile swath ofdestruction, authorities said.
In the eastern Georgia's Bulloch County, six mobile homes andone house were heavily damaged shortly after dawn today, but noinjuries were reported, the weather service said.
The winds destroyed up to nine mobile homes west of Bainbridge,Ga., Monday night, injuring three people, one seriously.
The twister blew away several homes, blew the roof off a nearbychurch, overturned cars and knocked down trees, Peavy said.
Two tornadoes struck near the towns of Malone and Bascom, about100 miles to the west of Madison, said Jackson County emergencymanagement director John Mader.
Three homes and a trailer were destroyed and five homesseriously damaged, he said, and two people were slightly injured.
Elsewhere in Georgia, trees and power lines were reported blowndown, a barn was reported destroyed and a tin roof was blown off anold building.
``There was this huge roar and then I heard a tree crack outthere and thought we were all gone,'' said Marie Prince, a MadisonCounty sheriff's dispatcher.
Two of the deaths occurred in mobile homes blown apart by thetornado, and four other houses were seriously damaged as well, saidMadison County Civil Defense Director Bernard Wilson.
A house-to-house search found no more bodies, but a man and ababy had to be freed from separate homes where they were trapped,Peavy said.
Fifteen people were injured, but none of the injuries was critical,according to Madison County Memorial Hospital administrator JeannieBaker.
Hail the size of golf balls and damagingwinds hit Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and Georgia.
Many county roads were blocked by fallen trees, he said, andofficials were surveying the area by helicopter.
As far as his office knew, all the damage was from one tornado,Peavy said.
You'd never knowthere was a trailer here,'' said Dorothy Butler, sister of one ofthe victims.
