But on Thursday, within hours of Pizarro's assassination, a manhad called the national radio network station Caracol and relatedin detail how the cartel had allegedly ordered the formerguerrilla's killing.
A telefaxed communique, purportedly from the Medellin drugcartel, denied responsibility Friday for the assassination ofpresidential candidate Carlos Pizarro, who died in a hail ofbullets Thursday aboard a Colombian jetliner carrying 97 people.
Minutes later, he stood up, pulled the weapon from his blackleather jacket, leaned forward and fired at Pizarro's head fromabout a foot away, Munevar said.
Since then, drug traffickers have killed more than 230 people,including judges, politicians, policemen, soldiers, newspaperemployees and two other presidential candidates.
The August assassination of another candidate, Sen. Luis CarlosGalan of the governing Liberal Party, prompted the government tolaunch a U.S.-backed crackdown on Colombia's cocaine cartels.
Friday's telefax accused police of instigating violence in orderto force the government to continue its crackdown on traffickers,and accused the police of putting out false communiques purportedto be from the cartel.
Gomez, suggesting that Barco does not have the confidence ofColombia's military, urged the president Friday to name a three-mancouncil to run Colombia's security forces.
Pizarro's killer, 25-year-old Alvaro Rodriguez, was sitting tworows behind Pizarro on the flight and apparently retrieved themachine gun from an airplane bathroom before returning to his seat,Capt.
On Friday, thousands of men, women and children filed pastPizarro's coffin, displayed in an open patio in the Congressbuilding.
Leaders of the leftist Patriotic Union Party, whose candidatewas slain last month, urged the government to cancel the May 27vote.
Three men disguised as police agents entered Lopez Trujillo'soffices on Wednesday and Thursday asking for the prelate, but hewas not in, said the church statement late Thursday.
The city's Catholic church said it discovered the plan to killLopez Trujillo after intercepting messages on a radio frequencyused by the men plotting the crime.
The Patriotic Union's presidential candidate, BernardoJaramillo, was fatally wounded March 22 at the Bogota airport by anassassin with a machine gun.
Introduction:
With a third presidential candidateassassinated, Colombia's government refused Friday to put off nextmonth's election and vowed to keep up the fight against drugtraffickers.
The plane, en route to the Caribbean coastal city ofBarranquilla, returned immediately to Bogota.
In another development, church officials in Medellin said theyhad foiled a plan to kill Colombia's Roman Catholic prelate,Cardinal Alfonso Lopez Trujillo.
Governing party candidate Cesar Gaviria, the presidentialfront-runner, suspended campaign activities following the Pizarrokilling.
