Lewis, who won four gold medals at the 1984 Summer Games and has been one of the great sprinters and long jumpers in track and field, said he is determined to help the sport's image.
"If it has been proven that he took drugs, I would think that (withdrawing the record) is the responsible thing for the sport," Lewis said Sunday.
That people cannot sacrifice for something in their life, whether it is a small insignificant thing to others or a big thing to the world, what's the use of living?"
"I've come to grips with the fact that I'm the best
I can be
and I can't ask for anything more," he said.
According to testimony, since 1981 Johnson has taken such drugs as furazabol, stanozolol and the human growth hormone, which is taken from the pituitary glands of human cadavers or can be taken in synthetic form.
"I feel if I can't sacrifice myself for the betterment of other people in track and field, well, then I cannot leave a legacy that will be remembered."
"I said, 'Look, I don't know what he is taking or what he is doing, but he is doing something.'
According to Francis' testimony, Johnson said that an unidentified man who had been talking with Lewis sat near the beer that was provided for the athletes to facilitate them in providing urine samples.
Charlie and Ben should own up to the fact that what they did was wrong, and should promise to never to do it again and move on with their lives.
He got out of those blocks like a caged lion," Lewis said in an interview Sunday at the Los Angeles Marathon, where he was representing a sponsor.
Lewis had finished second to Johnson, who set a world record of 9.79 seconds in winning the 100-meter gold medal, and subsequently also had to be tested.
"
Francis based his theory on the fact that Johnson took the steroid furazabol three weeks before the Games, not the difficult-to-detect stanozolol.
He is trying to say that everyone was on it, so they got on it," Lewis said.
"I could leave it all alone but the thing is, I want track to be a better sport than when I came.
At a Canadian inquiry into drug use in sport Monday at Toronto, Charlie Francis, a Canadian sprint coach, testified that Johnson might have drunk contaminated beer before a urinalysis.
Even before Lewis replaced Johnson as the gold-medal winner two days after the race, the U.S.
Olympian said he was happy with his result.
Any allocation or innuendo that Carl Lewis tampered with Ben Johnson's drink or sample is ludicrous," said David Greifinger, Lewis' attorney.
Lewis said Sunday that officials of the International Amateur Athletics Federation should disallow Johnson's world record from Rome because Francis has testified his sprinter took drugs before the World Championships.
IAAF officials, however, said the record will stand because Johnson passed a drug test after the 1987 race.
No way in the world does she take drugs," Lewis said, pounding a table.
"I think Ben is 110% irresponsible in not coming out and telling kids to stay off drugs," he said.
"
Now Lewis has been implicated in an alleged sabotage of Johnson's drug test, which returned a positive result for the banned anabolic steroid stanozolol.
Lewis said track and field is not infested with steroid users as some are beginning to believe in light of the Canadian inquiry.
He set the record at the 1987 World Championships at Rome, where Lewis finished second in 9.93 seconds.
But I still believe that through it all I want to help every single person whether they make $50 a meet or near what I make."
Francis said that two witnesses told him that the stranger had spoken with Lewis in another area of the waiting room.
"These sound like the last acts of desperate men who know they've committed wrong and see no other way out other than to continue to lie and to fabricate stories. "
Lewis said their philosophy was inspired by the late Dr. Martin Luther King, who once said it is important to make such sacrifices. "
The drugs induce the growth of muscle tissue, and some athletes claim, help performances. "
If that were to happen, Lewis would replace Johnson as the world record-holder.
I make the most money, I get the appearances.
In finishing second at the Olympics, Lewis set a U.S. record of 9.92 seconds.
But Lewis defended Evelyn Ashford, a world-class sprinter who was implicated as a steroid user in Francis' testimony last week.
"That's what people don't realize," he said.
Lewis, however, refused to implicate any of his colleagues.
It didn't ease the pain of not winning and feeling he (Johnson) was on drugs.
"He needs to stand up and say, 'Don't do it.
Lewis said his deep-rooted conviction comes from his parents, who raised him to stand by his beliefs.
