"This particular study deals onlywith TB," says Dr. Jonathan Samet, a respiratory-disease expert at theUniversity of New Mexico, "but the observations may apply to other organisms,such as the respiratory viruses that cause flu.
In the study, Nardell estimated that if outdoor airventilation in the government building had been doubled -- to about 35 cubicfeet per minute, a level that Massachusetts recommends for buildings wheresmoking is permitted -- only half as many workers would have been infectedwith tuberculosis.
"In a study published in the Augustissue of the American Review of Respiratory Diseases, Nardell and colleaguesat Harvard Medical School found that an outbreak of tuberculosis documented inone unidentified government building could have been cut in half had theventilation been better.
So the infectious bugsthat a worker exhales at one end of the building can end up, via theventilation system, being inhaled at the other end.
"Experts
saythe problem is not the same as "sick building syndrome" -- a situation inwhich workers are exposed chronically to toxic chemicals and gases emittedfrom carpets, furniture and other building materials.
At the other end of the building, halfan hour later, a janitor pauses in his work and yawns.
The evidence comes from variousstudies of tuberculosis, measles and flu that spread in a manner that can onlybe explained by poor air ventilation.
"By recirculating the air,you spread it throughout the building," says Nardell.
"It may survive several hours in dry air," says VernonKnight, a respiratory virus disease expert at Baylor College of Medicine inHouston.
People are the source," says Dr. Edward Nardell, who studiesairborne infections for the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
Nor is it to blame forlast month's outbreak in Richmond of Legionnaire's disease -- an illnesscaused by a bug linked to wet, damp spaces rather than poor ventilation.
The building's ventilationsystem permitted circulation of some outdoor air -- 15 cubic feet per minute-- a low level commonly found in buildings since the 1930s.
In his tuberculosis study, hefound that the biggest benefit comes from improving the worst ventilationsystems that allow very little fresh air.
A poor ventilation system that does little more thanrecycle old, stale air from one end of the building to another.
Flu and colds will probably never be eliminated from theworkplace entirely, and it may not make sense to install a new ventilationsystem unless the air quality is very low.
But as in "sick building syndrome," it's the airtight environment that setsthe stage for problems.
"YOU'RE INTERESTEDEmployees who think that poor air quality at their workplaceis contributing to health problems can call Cal-OSHA, a state agency thatmonitors worker safety and health.
"Nardell and others recognize that the solution to thisproblem -- fixing or replacing ventilation systems to include more fresh air-- can be expensive.
That'sbecause, in today's modern office buildings, recirculated air can meanrecycled flu and other airborne infections.
The next day, thejanitor is sick with the same flu the CEO had.
