The names for Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms this yearare:
Arthur, Bertha, Cesar, Diana, Edouard, Fran, Gustav, Hortense,Isidore, Josephine, Klaus, Lili, Marco, Nana, Omar, Paloma, Rene,Sally, Teddy, Vicky and Wilfred.
With SLOSH, forecasters can predict the height of the stormsurge _ the mass of water piled up by the storm that is ahurricane's most destructive component
_ anywhere along the U.S.coast by punching in a storm's speed, size and intensity, Sheetssaid.
``No one knows for sure, but the odds are, Florida and the EastCoast are going to get it,'' William Gray, professor of atmosphericscience at Colorado State University, told a national conference ofweather experts this month.
At the advent of the Atlantic hurricane season, which runs fromJune 1 to Nov. 30, Sheets and other hurricane experts are usingHugo's example to get the attention of complacent coastal residentswho've never experienced such fury.
If Hugo had struck a major coastal population center, thedestruction would have been greater than most Americans have everseen, according to computer simulations known as SLOSH models, forSea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes.
``The population density in South Carolina is a lot differentfrom the Florida coast, New Jersey or Galveston, Texas,'' Sheetssaid.
Early warnings about Hugo last September allowed 350,000 peopleto evacuate safely, and in South Carolina the worst of thehurricane struck the Francis Marion National Forest betweenCharleston and Myrtle Beach, Sheets said.
Hugo was the worst hurricane to strike the southeastern U.S.coast since Betsy hit the Florida Keys in 1965, killing 74 beforeit went on to Missisippi and Louisiana.
According to one of the nation's leading hurricane experts, Hugomay have been the first in a new era of killer storms.
Hugo, which caused an unprecedented $10 billion in damage,killed 28 people in the Lesser Antilles islands and an additional29 in South Carolina.
Hehad figured the 1989 season would be relatively mild, with onlyfour hurricanes; instead, seven hurricanes and four tropical stormskilled a total of 84 people.
But it would have been much more deadly if it had hit almostanywhere else, says Bob Sheets, director of the National HurricaneCenter.
Introduction:   People caught by Hurricane Hugo lastyear might disagree, but forecasters here say the deadly storm mayhave had a positive side effect _
it got the public's attention.
Tropical storms have been recorded in the Atlantic in everymonth except April, but are rare outside the June 1 to Nov. 30season.
``We'll take advantage of the fact that there was a Hugo lastyear and raise people's awareness,'' said Sheets.
``Compare that situation to the Miami-through-Palm Beach area_ all of Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties would have been ...destroyed.''
It heavily damaged the fishing village of McClellanville andseveral small rural communities, but the population there is sparse.
