In a suit filed against the city Nov. 14, 1989, the Police Department and officers Jana Younger, Fred Sedillos and James Struck, Guzman-Flores contends that he was grabbed from behind by Younger while in the alley.
"They used forcible brutality by hitting me with the baton on my elbow, knees and back, forcing me to drop down on the sidewalk with my face slammed against the pavement," Luna said in the complaint.
In another incident, Luis C. Luna, 50, alleges in a complaint filed with the city on June 27, 1989, that he was beaten by three officers near a restaurant in Port Hueneme.
Guzman-Flores said he was working in a motorcycle repair shop on Jan. 27, 1989, when his boss asked him to investigate a noise in the alley behind the shop in the 1500 block of South Pine Street.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Flores but later dismissed all charges during Flores' trial because police failed to turn over a recording of a dispatcher's call requesting that officers investigate the incident at the motorcycle shop, McCracken said.
The officer jumped out and started pushing me back against the pillar in front of the building, using his baton on my throat," Luna said in the complaint.
Edward Brodie, misdemeanor supervisor for the office, said the decisions not to prosecute the suspects do not necessarily mean that Oxnard police were not justified in making the arrests.
Luna, a public works inspector for the city of Port Hueneme, said he walked up to the police car and asked Officer Peter Ruggiero "in a kidding manner" what he was doing in Port Hueneme. "
Luna said in an interview that he, his wife and several friends were leaving the restaurant on July 16, 1988, when an Oxnard police car pulled up in front of the group.
He said, however, that the decisions by the district attorney's office not to prosecute the suspects do not reflect poorly on the department.
The men involved in three of the five incidents have filed police brutality lawsuits against the city, the department or the police officers involved.
In a fifth and more recent incident, the district attorney's office declined to file a charge of assaulting an officer against an Oxnard man who says he and several other guests at a June 15 private party were beaten by Oxnard police.
But Jean Farley, a supervisor for the Ventura County public defender's office, said it is extremely rare for the district attorney's office not to prosecute a suspect who is accused by police.
But Flores' lawyer, Sherrie L. McCracken, said the report states that officers were at the shop responding to a complaint of a man with a gun.
Flores and his brothers, Alex, 19, and Luis Jr., 24 -- all of whom suffered gashes and scrapes on their heads and bodies -- said the officers beat them without provocation.
In each of the four cases, Brodie said, his office did not prosecute because it found that police did not provide enough evidence to prove the charges "beyond a reasonable doubt."
But the district attorney's office declined to file any charges because the police report failed to show that Gonzalez was involved in the altercation, Brodie said.
Officer Robert Camarillo said in a police report that Cornett was arrested in the 3600 block of Taffrail Road on suspicion of brandishing a weapon, resisting arrest and possessing a loaded firearm.
He failed, however, to submit the claim for damages during the statutory six-month period after the incident and was barred by law from filing a lawsuit.
According to a police report filed by Officer Michael Cole, police were sent to a parking lot outside the Oxnard Moose Lodge to investigate a report of an altercation between several men after a wedding reception.
Introduction:Over the past two years, the Ventura County district attorney's office in four separate incidents has declined to prosecute suspects who contended that they were victims of police brutality while being arrested for various offenses by Oxnard officers, records show.
But a lawsuit against Camarillo filed May 8, 1989, alleges that while in custody at the police station, Camarillo shoved and punched Cornett in the mouth. "
In a suit filed June 29, Gonzalez said he was standing on Sunkist Circle when the dog attacked him, biting him on the arm and left shoulder.
The district attorney's office decided to prosecute Luna, but in September, 1988 -- before his trial began -- all charges against him were withdrawn for lack of evidence, Brodie said.
In a third incident, Louis M. Cornett, a retired teacher and licensed gun dealer, said he was beaten on Oct. 20 while in custody at Oxnard police headquarters.
Cornett, maintaining that he never struggled with the officer, said he suffered a broken tooth and a cut lip during the beating.
Flores was handcuffed and shoved to the ground, causing Sedillos to trip and fall on him, according to the suit.
Based upon my review of all the reports, the charges were the most appropriate charges to file," said Deputy Dist.
In a fourth incident, Alejandro Guzman-Flores, 21, accused three Oxnard officers of beating him on his face, causing severe damage to his eyesight.
When he asked the officer why he was being shoved, Ruggiero told him that he was under arrest, according to the complaint.
The district attorney's office declined to file charges against Cornett because, Brodie said, there was insufficient evidence to prove that Cornett brandished a gun.
Fox said Gonzalez did not attend the wedding but was visiting a friend nearby and went to the parking lot to find out what was causing the commotion.
The latest incident involving an accusation of police brutality stemmed from the June 15 clash between 18 officers and about 12 party guests at a house in the 1300 block of South E Street.
In an incident April 7, Sergio E. Gonzalez, 19, accused Oxnard officers of ordering a police dog to attack him before he was arrested.
When he searched Cornett's car, Camarillo said, he found a semiautomatic handgun, several rounds of ammunition and a 12-gauge shotgun.
The officer poked him with a baton and questioned him about a car parked nearby, Guzman-Flores said in the suit.
Edward M. Fox, an attorney representing Gonzalez, said his client, a gardener, might suffer some permanent injury to his right arm.
