Concern that the disease can be transmitted to humans has made the subject Topic A in the pubs and press of Britain, and has put a serious crimp in domestic beef sales.
Introduction:"Mad cow" disease, an enigmatic nervous disorder that has killed thousands of cattle in Britain, is causing trade friction in Europe and is threatening the $3.7-billion British beef industry.
The press went wild with the story, suggesting, in boldface, that if cats can get it, people can too.
On Friday, West Germany joined France in a ban on British beef imports, citing health fears related to the mysterious ailment, whose technical name is bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE).
"It's totally unjustified and illegal," said Patrick Barrow, spokesman for the Meat and Livestock Commission, a trade organization.
The price of British beef is dropping in the wake of the "mad cow" scare.
Although other countries have recently placed some restrictions on British beef and cattle, the French and German moves were the strongest by far.
British officials complain that the French and German import ban is a result of economic, not health, concerns.
Some experts believe that cattle contracted the disease as a result of eating food contaminated with the remains of sheep infected with a BSE-like disease called scrapie.
Despite assurances from the British government that the beef is safe, consumers and some scientists remain skeptical.
Some regulations were enacted to fight the disease, but more overt was the publicity campaign: Princess Anne said her family was still eating British beef.
Therefore, British officials believe, France and West Germany imposed the bans to protect their domestic sales.
The United States does not import British beef and recently rescinded permits for the importation of live cattle.
On May 11, the Ministry of Agriculture revealed that a Siamese cat had died from a disease identical to BSE.
Mad cow disease has been responsible for the deaths of nearly 14,000 cows since it was first noticed in the mid-1980s.
