Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who had thanked the Jamaican-bornrunner for the ``thrill of a lifetime'' after his record-breaking9.79-second performance Saturday, called the drug scandal ``amoment of great sorrow for all Canadians.''
``It puts a dent in Canada,'' said Scott Shaw, a 10th gradestudent in Calgary, Alberta, said Tuesday.
``We've just seen the destruction of a role model,'' said formerdownhill skier Ken Read, of Calgary, now Canada's representative onthe International Olympic Committee's athletics commission.
``From time to time people would come to me in a private way
_
and this happened one or two times ...
that maybe Ben Johnson isusing steroids or other drugs,'' he said.
In August, fans were outraged when hockey legend WayneGretzky, another national hero, was traded from the Edmonton Oilersto the Los Angeles Kings.
He said the allegations came from no one officially connectedwith the Olympic team and that he had heard similar, unfoundedallegations about other atheletes in the past.
``I feel terribly sad for him,'' said Fergus Kilmartin, 36, ofCoquitlam, British Colombia.
Mike Sokowski, a teammate at the 1984 Olympic Games in LosAngeles, said: ``Ben's a pretty simple guy.
``Everybody knew in advance that Mr. Johnson, if he wins amedal, was going to be tested,'' said Charest.
Sports Minister Jean Charest, who called the incident ``anational embarrassment,'' said Johnson will be banned from Canada'snational team for life.
Charest said he didn't press Johnson to have a drug test
becausehe thought the sprinter was aware that medal winners at theOlympics would be tested for drugs immediately followingcompetition.
``My brother is not guilty,'' a distaught Rodney told reportersin her yard in the Toronto suburb of Rexdale.
Introduction:
Canadians were shamed, angry and saddened Tuesdaythat national hero Ben Johnson was stripped of his Olympic goldmedal for using drugs to enhance his performance.
Canadian speedskater Gaetan Boucher judged the sprinter harshly,saying he has ``no respect'' for an athlete who takes drugs.
Outside the townhouse, police were called in to control thecrowd and the traffic.
A disappointed nation awaited the return of the sprinter after aurine sample was found to contain traces of anabolic steroids.
Charest said his government accepted thevalidity of the tests and the suspension would be effective pendingan appeal from Johnson.
Canada's sole gold medal went to American Carl Lewis, who finishedsecond in the 100-meter dash.
Boucher won two gold medals at the 1984 Winter Games in Sarajevo,Yugoslavia.
