Introduction:
The Agriculture Department says it has been ontop of the drought since March 1, monitoring the situation, settingup hotlines to handle worried callers and issuing enough statementsto paper a thousand bird cages, easy.
Returning to Washington, Lyng briefs the president andvice president on the drought and says that there is agreementamong congressmen, senators, farm groups and governors that it istoo early for emergency relief measures.
Lyng authorizes additional emergency provisions indrought counties, including permission for selling hay to anyone,and the harvest of ACR, CUA and CRP land as green chop forimmediate feeding to livestock or silage.
The White House announces a new Interagency DroughtPolicy Committee made up of USDA, Interior, the Office of the VicePresident and several other agencies.
Lyng briefs Senate and House Agriculture Committees onthe drought and offers to cooperate with the Congressional ReliefTask Force announced by Sen. Patrich Leahy, D-Vt., and Rep. Kika dela Garza, D-Texas.
``It was my idea, my memory isn't what it used to be,'' quippedSally Michael, the department's deputy director of information.``This helps me keep track of what we've done.''
USDA announces that special crop surveys in severalstates and other steps will be taken to update the department'sJuly 12 crop report and supply-and-demand projections for fallharvets, including corn and soybeans.
Inreality, though the drought panel was set up by Lyng on March 1,the press release announcing the action was not issued until April22.
Lyng meets with the Congressional Drought Relief TaskForce, which issues a ``statement of general agreements'' callingon the secretary to implement various forms of disaster assistance.
The blurb also gave the number of the USDA press release thatformally announced the task force creation, but not its date.
Standing hay on farms held in inventory (taken over)
bythe Farmers Home Administration can be sold at a reasonable cost tohelp feed livestock in drought counties where state offices of theAgricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service have authorizedrelease of set-aside acres for haying and grazing.
One of the latest informational gimmicks is a ``USDABackgrounder'' listing the department's ``drought-related actions''since the blotter-like furnaces began roaring across most of thenation.
After the White House meeting, the Interagency DroughtPolicy Committee meets for the second time at USDA.
One involved meat purchases for schoolcafeterias and the other a credit deal for the sale of meat toMexico.
Lyng announces haying will be allowed on CRP land if acounty has been approved for emergency haying and grazing of ACRand CUA land due to drought.
An additional $50 million has been set aside to buybulk ground beef for donation to schools lunch and other feedingprograms, to help cattle producers hurt by drought.
Counties found to be suffering from drought will beallowed emergency haying and grazing of Acreage ConservationReserve (ACR) and Conservation Use Acreage (CUA).
Departments of State andTransportation, and the Council of Economic Advisers weresubsequently added.
Federal and state officials set up a national hayinformation network, or HayNet, to assist in locating foragesupplies.
Department officials questioned at the time said they attachedno significance to keeping the task force secret for seven weeksbefore announcing it.
Secretary of Agriculture Richard E. Lyng establishesUSDA Drought Task Force under the chairmanship of Deputy SecretaryPeter C. Myers.
Michael agreed during questioning by a reporter that the actionlist is lean on actual dollars going into the drought aid.
The firstlists 22 separate drought ``actions'' by USDA or its people,beginning more than four months ago.
At this time,haying and grazing do not apply to Conservation Reserve Program(CRP) acreage.
Lyng and other USDA officials meet in Chicago with theNational Governors' Association Committee on Agriculture and RuralDevelopment.
In its first day of operation, USDA's hotline logsmore than 600 calls in 10 hours.
Greatest number of calls thefirst day are from Iowa, Wisconsin and North Dakota.
Lyng announces that farmers in designated droughtcounties will be authorized to harvest hay from land in theConservation Reserve Program.
Members _ agency administrators and key USDApersonnel
_ will constantly monitor the potential droughtsituation.''
While in Chicago, Lyng announces a toll-free hotlineto answer questions about federal services available in droughtareas.
The Interagency Drought Policy Committee meets for thefirst time.
Department will hold news conference July 12 followingrelease of crop report and supply-demand projections.
Excerpts from other USDA actions cited by the report:   _
May 31.
