Of course, Mr. Kelley -- not to be confused with the otherJohn Kelley, who won the Boston Marathon in 1957 -- isn't therunner
he was in 1935 when he won the race, in 2 hours, 32minutes, 7 seconds.
Bounding up a hill in his thin green Windbreaker, withsand from the beach blowing into his face, Mr. Kelley shoutsover the howling gale: "This isn't too bad, you know," hesays, though the wind chill factor is about 20 below.
And even at the age of 83, he probablywill finish ahead of a large number of the 13,000 runnersexpected to compete -- officially or unofficially -- on April15.Bill Rodgers, a four-time Boston Marathon winner who plansto run again this year, marvels at Mr. Kelley: "It'sincomprehensible that a man his age is doing what he's doing.
In recent years, I've been in training 12 months ayear," he says, though the serious stuff -- a daily one-hourrun, sprints on the track and long, 2 1/2-hour runs everyother week -- begins in December.
"What that means," explains Kenneth Cooper, the physicianwho wrote "Aerobics" and several sequels and is now at workon a book on elderly athletes, "is that Johnny has the bodyof a man 23 years younger.
"He and his wife, Laura, live in a two-bedroom ranch-stylehouse here in East Dennis, with more than 350 trophies,medals and sweat-stained marathon numbers scattered about.
When John Kelley first toed the line in 1928, George Bushwasn't yet in kindergarten, Joe DiMaggio was an unknown andNike was the winged goddess of victory, not a running shoe.
Recalls SuniTomomitsu, one of the runners: "At first we thought, `Oh,wow, he's like Mafia man.'
(He doesn't count the mileshe puts in, as many long-distance runners obsessively do, buthe says he wouldn't object to an estimate of about 50 miles aweek.)Mr.
Twostate troopers will run alongside the 5-foot-6, 130-pound Mr.
Kelley into Boston so he won't be trampled by "groupies," ashe calls them, clamoring to shake his hand.
Mr.
Kelley well knows the jagged course from Hopkinton todowntown Boston:The first challenge comes five miles into the race, wherea set of little hills can get a psyched runner to wasteenergy charging up the slopes.
A two-time winnerin Boston (1935 and 1945) and runner-up seven times,
Mr.
Kelley is to be the oldest competitor in the race
this year-- as he has been for 15 years.
"Though
he isn't the oldest person ever to enter the BostonMarathon, Mr. Kelley is the oldest to run it.
Today, of course, the Boston Marathon is a big deal, coveredby TV from start to finish and offering $402,000 altogetherin prize
money.
In those days, Mr. Kelley recalls, he ran in black leatherhigh-jumping shoes that he cut open at the toes with a razorblade.
Then, at the end of a long column of oak andmaple trees, is Heartbreak Hill, his nemesis.
Heisn't particular about brands of shoes
("I wear them all")
orwhat he eats ("I never eat broccoli, but I love steak and icecream.")Mr.
This ismy warm up: I empty the dishwasher, I set up the coffeepot,but I don't plug it in.
The 82-year-old Mrs. Kelley adds, "I justtry to stay in his shadow, but I have a hard time even doingthat.
Mr.
Kelley is such an institution that Hopkinton, Mass.,where the race begins, has made him an honorary citizen.
(He has competed, alltold, in 112 marathons, including the 1936 and 1948 Olympics.
Last year, fiveJapanese runners were waved away by the bodyguards, as theysidled up to the old celebrity during the race.
Kelley always trains at 5 a.m., and alone: "It's aquiet time, no traffic; the air is fresh and sweet."
Physiologically,whatever that means, I got all A's," Mr. Kelley reports ofhis checkup four months ago.
In all the years since, he hasmissed the race just once, in 1967.
"He's a strange man," says Laura Kelley, in awe of herhusband's vigor.
Aghast is more like it," says Leslie Pawson, 86, athree-time Boston champion who ran against Mr. Kelley half acentury ago.
With the approach of spring, he takes to the alder andscrub-pine hills and bluffs where the sun can be seen risingover Cape Cod Bay.
"In 1928, when he was 21, he entered his first BostonMarathon but didn't finish.
Starting at dawn (sixhours before the official noon start), Mr. Foley wouldeventually saunter across the finish line in the moonlight.
"I would have loved to run with the worst pair ofsneakers on the market today," he says.
After his morning run, he spends a coupleof hours painting (still lifes and Cape Cod scenes), a hobbyhe took up about 25 years ago.
On the stress test the clinic gives, Mr.
Kelley holds the endurance record for his age group.
"In a rare moment of reflection, Mr. Kelley explains whatmakes him tick: "I paint because I like it.
"That's not aprediction, just a goal," he says.
A mechanic for Boston Edison Co. before he retired in1972, Mr. Kelley started running in the evenings after workmore than six decades ago.
Peter Foley,who was born in 1859, was a regular until he was well intohis 80s.
A mile and a half later,there's new reason to beware: The smells of Cavanaugh'sBakery can set off hunger pangs.
--
It's 5:30 a.m., an icy rain isfalling from an indigo sky, and there's a stiff northeaster.
"The winners get a medal and $55,000," says Mr. Kelley.
Boston'sskyline, 2 1/2 miles in the distance, can seem so far away.
Then, in 1933, he finished 37th ina field of about 200 runners.
Each year, he visits the Cooper Clinic at the Aerobics Centerin Dallas for a battery of endurance tests. "
All day long, I did what my boss told me todo," he recalls.
"The rosy-cheeked, supple Mr. Kelley is a medical wonder.
