------------------------------------------------
ROUGH DIAMOND PRODUCTION               (MILLION CARATS)
------------------------------------------------
1991     1990
1987
------------------------------------------------Australia
36       36
30Zaire                 19       24        21Botswana            16.5     17.3
13CIS                   13       15
12South Africa         8.2      8.5       9.6South America
1.4      0.8         1Angola               1.3
1.3
0.9Others               1.8      2.1
2.35 ------------------------------------------------Source:
Metals &amp; Minerals Annual Review ------------------------------------------------
The onset of the dry seasonand the fall in river levels from the end of May this year has encouragedwhat De Beers, the South African group that dominates the world diamondbusiness, describes as 'a sudden and unprecedented explosion in the supplyof illicit Angolan diamonds reaching the market'.Even though there are so many diggers at work, questions are being askedabout whether there might be more to this 'explosion.'
But the cartel has ensured that rough (uncut) diamond prices have risensteadily since the 1930s - even when in the depths of the 1981-86 recessionthe price of a top-quality, one carat gem diamond slumped in the retailmarket from Dollars 60,000 to Dollars 10,000.The cartel is organised by De Beers' London-based Central SellingOrganisation, which markets about 80 per cent of the world's rough diamonds.
This rise of illegal mining,particularly in the Cuango region, which produces 80 per cent of Angola'sdiamonds and some of its highest-quality gem stones, started in May, 1991,after the peace accord which allowed freedom of movement for the first timein 16 years.
Mr Harry Oppenheimer, whose family effectively controls both De Beers andits sister group, the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa, wasdefending the cartel again last week at the formal opening of the R1.1bnVenetia diamond mine in the Transvaal. '
The CSO has been mopping up as many of the smuggled Angolan diamonds aspossible to stop havoc being created in a business already sufferingseverely from soggy demand in the US and Japan, the two biggest markets,which share about two-thirds of demand between them.
In this way it has been able topreserve an essential degree of stability in the price of this ultimateluxury of gem diamonds, to the common advantage of producers, processors andconsumers of this unique natural product.
In Canada's Northwest Territories, the discovery of 81 small diamonds, someof gem quality, has sparked the biggest rush to stake mining claims in thehistory of the North American industry.
Introduction:IT IS ironic that there is an unprecedented, greedy rush for diamonds byminers in Angola and Canada precisely at a time when the diamond business isin turmoil and questions are inevitably being asked about the ability of theworld's most successful cartel to keep its tight grip on the market.
De Beers has taken good care that merchant stocks have never again beenbuilt for speculative reasons, frequently going to the banks, the potentialfinanciers of stockpiling operations, to 'educate' them about the way thediamond market works.
'What the CSO for many years has done successfully, is to operate a bufferpool, stocking diamonds in bad times and liquidating its stocks when demandis in excess of the level of supply.
But in the meantime Mr Julian Ogilvie Thompson, De Beers' chairman, insiststhat the CSO's control of the diamond market is not slipping.
Byapplying the deferred purchases clauses in our contracts with producers weare applying the right medicine to ensure that demand matches supply andthat the diamond market will remain stable'.The future of De Beers' diamond operations in Namibia were discussed withthe government there yesterday.
What is also remarkable is that all those scrambling for diamonds in Angolaor dropping out of the skies to stake expensive claims in Canada take
it forgranted that the diamond cartel will be able to continue to keep prices upand make all their efforts worthwhile.
Apart from De Beers' own production from Namibia and South Africa, the CSOhandles rough gem diamonds from Angola, Australia, Botswana, Russia,Tanzania and Zaire.
The fact is that the level of world diamond production, whichis carried on in many countries, cannot be controlled.
De Beers releases a controlled stream of rough diamonds to the marketthrough 'sights' offered by the CSO ten times a year to about 160 selectedbuyers.
In spite of all this hectic activity, it is very unlikely that anyone willfind enough big diamonds to make the development of Canada's first diamondmine worthwhile.
'By mopping up Angolan supplies we can say that more of the world's roughdiamonds are passing through the CSO than ever before,' he says. '
The contents are judged by the CSO to balance therequirements of the buyers with market demand.
CDM, has diamond mining operations over a coastal areaextending 100 km north of the Orange River and recently brought the Auchasand Elizabeth Bay mines into production.
Merchants, particularly in Israel, stockpiled diamonds on borrowed money asa hedge against inflation and when recession hit they had to dump diamondsfaster than the Central Selling Organisation could mop them up.
The cartel nearly lost control of the market in the early 1980s.
The odds in favour of making a fortune are much better for the diamondhunters in Angola.
The CSO does not, and could not, runa monopolistic system,' he said. '
In the past there have been suggestions thatCDM, De Beers' wholly-owned subsidiary, might be at least partlynationalised.
To cool the market, theCSO imposed swingeing price increases: 13.5 per cent in May 1988 and 15.5per cent in March 1989.
Underlying the boom was phenomenal growth in demandfor diamonds in Japan where lack of living space encourages people todisplay their wealth by buying small but expensive items.
The CSO boostedthe trend with clever promotion so that today diamond engagement rings areregularly exchanged in Japan whereas forthcoming marriages traditionallywere celebrated over a cup of rice wine.
The CSO'sdiamond stocks, worth under Dollars 1bn in 1980 rose to Dollars 1.9bn by1984.
As well as experienced miners, many soldiers who could not find civilianjobs have made their way to the diamond areas.
It has also toldthe producers to cut deliveries by 25 per cent - something the CSO contractspermit at times of stress.
Buyers have either to acceptall the diamonds or reject the box.
More than Dollars 1m-worth of gem diamonds a day arebeing smuggled out of that country for sale in Antwerp.
