The organization buys rough diamonds from De Beers' own mines,which represent 30 percent of world production, and from producersin Tanzania, South Africa, Zaire, Botswana, Namibia, Australia andthe Soviet Union.
The organization sells most of the Soviet Union's West-bounddiamonds, but the Soviets, the biggest value producer, have beenacting more independently and squeezing the cartel's margins, theexperts say.
The organization must this year renegotiate five-year contractswith Botswana, the second biggest diamond producer in terms ofvalue, and Argyle Diamonds of Western Australia, the biggestproducer in terms of quantity.
Jack Lunzer, managing director of IDC Ltd., an independentdiamond distributor in London, said De Beers undoubtedly willcontinue to control the major part of world production, but itsmarketing arm's profits will fall.
This is the Central Selling Organization, London-based marketingarm of the De Beers diamond empire, controlled by the wealthyOppenheimer family of South Africa.
Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, a diamond merchant, became chairman ofDe Beers in 1929 and five years later formed Diamond Trading Co.,the precursor of today's cartel.
Of all diamonds mined, only 15 percent will end up in jewelry,but these represent 80 percent of the value of the world's diamondproduction.
The gems then go to cutters in the world's major diamond-cuttingcenters: Bombay, India; Tel Aviv, Israel; Antwerp, Belgium; and NewYork.
After growth spurts of 19 percent in 1987 and 35 percent in1988, rough diamond sales fell 2 percent to $4.09 billion last yearbecause of slowing economies, high interest rates and theorganization's two double-digit price increases in 1988 and 1989.
The government of newly independent Namibia, meanwhile, isexpected to demand a one-fifth stake in Consolidated Diamond Mines,De Beers' Namibian subsidiary.
During the early 1980s, when high interest rates caused theworst diamond slump since the 1930s, the organization prevented themarket's collapse by doubling its diamond stockpile to nearly $2billion worth.
Ten times a year, at sales called ``sights,'' the clientsare offered a selection of diamonds chosen by the organization andplaced in a simple cardboard box.
Formally known as De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., and based inKimberley, South Africa, the company was formed in 1888 by theBritish industrial colonialist Cecil Rhodes.
Last year, it spent $160 million onadvertising and promotion, trying, for example, to boost purchasesof men's diamond jewelry.
``We are as strongly in control of the diamond market as we havebeen for many years,'' said Tim Capon, the cartel's director.
The decline was sharpest in the second half of the year, whensales fell 24 percent from the first six months.
De Beers' South African interests face an uncertain future,largely because of a newly energized political will by the blackmajority in that country, an important diamond producer.
Oppenheimer, who linked the diamond business with his extensiveAnglo American Corp. gold-mining interests, is credited withsteering De Beers through the Depression.
He died in 1957 and wassucceeded by his son, Harry Oppenheimer, who has made the companymore internationally minded and therefore less vulnerable.
Said Lunzer: ``
It's not unnatural for people in the producingcountries to say, `Are we getting a proper share of the value ofour national resource?'''
Today, diamonds remain ``the gem of gems,'' althoughmillions of people own them.
Gold Fields acknowledged the complaint was a defensive maneuveragainst a hostile, and ultimately unsuccessful, takeover bid fromOppenheimer-controlled Minorco SA last year.
Although its prosperity and control of the world diamondindustry looks unchallengeable, the pressures could loosen its gripand crimp its profits.
Thispast week, De Beers announced it was increasing prices 5.5 percent,compared to a 15.5 percent increase a year earlier.
``There was a very definite, noticeable slack in demand,'' saidanalyst Peter Miller of Yorkton Securities Inc. in London.
Apparently attempting to limit risk, De Beers recently announcedit would split South African and foreign interests into twopublicly held companies, one based in Switzerland.
``This year is going to be a critical one for De Beers,'' saysDiamond
Intelligence Briefs, a trade publication.
Few diamond-producing countries dare sell their output outsidethe organization, and some bold enough to leave have returnedbecause of the difficulty in peddling diamonds alone.
But scratch the surface of this secretive world, and the diamondbusiness loses some sparkle.
