Guzman is the ideologist of the organization, but Morote isconsidered the military strategist of the guerrillas and theadvocate of attacks against peasant communities in the highlandsthat have formed civil defense units on the orders of the military.
Officials said the capture of Osman Morote, 43, considered themost radical leader of the movement, was the hardest blow to datefor the rebels since they launched their guerrilla war in theAndean highlands in May 1980.
Morote, known within the rebel band as ``Comrade Remigio,'' issecond in importance only to Guzman, who founded the Shining Pathas a splinter group of the Peruvian Communist Party.
There have been reports in recent months of a growing rivalrybetween Morote and Guzman, and Mantilla said he did not discountthe possibility that Guzman betrayed Morote to get him out of theway.
Introduction:
Police captured the top military leader of theShining Path, a Maoist rebel group whose eight-year guerrilla warhas taken more than 10,000 lives in Peru, officials said Monday.
Col. Javier Palacios, a top official in the counterinsurgencypolice, presented Morote to the press Monday but did let him speak.
``Forsome Shining Path experts, Morote might even be, in practice, thetrue leader of the organization.''
Counterinsurgency sources said Morote's capture will create apower vacuum within the central committee of the Shining Path andspark tension until a replacement is found.
The colonel said Morote arrived in Lima a week ago from thenorthern highlands to coordinate terrorists attacks in the capital.
Guzman, Morote and other Shining Path leaders went undergroundin the late 1970s before launching their guerrilla war, which hasclaimed more than 10,000 lives.
Palacios said the attacks were planned this week to mark the secondanniversary of prison riots in which security forces killed morethan 250 rebel inmates.
2 of the party and itsmilitary chief,'' the independent magazine Si said recently.
Variousrumors say that he is living abroad, that he moves about Perudisguised as a priest, that he works as a day laborer in Lima'scrowded street markets.
The Shining Path devoted itself to 10 years of semi-clandestinepolitical work with peasants in the impoverished Andean highlandsbefore taking up arms.
