But next spring many of the seeds, fertilized by nutrients leaching into the soil from the snow-packed ash, will sprout, along with a bouquet of grasses, flowers and shrubs, as burnt areas of the park erupt with life.
Wyoming's U.S. senators, Republicans Malcolm Wallop and Alan K. Simpson, are mindful of the damage the fires caused the state's tourist industry this year, as well as the threat to gateway towns near the park.
The burnt "snags," as charred tree trunks are called, creak in the wind above Mr. Despain and are all that remain of a forest section that sprouted after a fire swept through here about the time of the Civil War.
New Jersey's governor, Thomas Kean, for instance, announced that his state planned to donate thousands of evergreen seedlings to replant Yellowstone, apparently without realizing that none of the proffered species are indigenous to the park.
At exactly 7:24, as predicted by the sign in the window of the tourist-information office, Old Faithful sputtered once, twice and shot plumes of white steam high into the fading light.
Within these 15-by-25-meter plots, he and other researchers cataloged the size and the number of lodgepole pines, as well as the variety of plant growth on the forest floor.
One clue will be that the Idaho fescue, blue bunch wheat grass and pine grass growing in fields where fire returned nutrients to the soil will be as much as a foot taller than the meadows that escaped the flames.
The ground clutter thickens, more trees fall, and, with the help of a prolonged drought, the old forest creates its own funeral pyre.
Meanwhile, nutrients that were bound up in the cells of mature pines for hundreds of years have been returned in the form of ash to the soil as fertilizer for next year's growth.
"We see what's going on here not as devastation and destruction, but, rather, rebirth and renewal of these ecosystems," says John Varley, Yellowstone's chief of research and Mr. Despain's boss.
Critics, including elected officials from Western states and the logging and tourist industries, have grabbed headlines by blaming that policy for fueling the inferno that this summer raged over half of Yellowstone's 2.2 million acres and cost more than $100 million to fight and clean up.
The profusion of pine seeds is just one of the rejuvenating forces at work in Yellowstone even as the fires, largely quenched this week by rain and snow, still smolder.
On a recent evening, about a hundred park visitors made the pilgrimage to one of the world's natural wonders -- the largest concentration of geysers to be found anywhere on earth.
Driving along the 140 miles of the park's upper and lower scenic loop -- on roads open to park visitors -- one sees a Yellowstone that is a patchwork of green, brown and blackened forest and meadow.
Moving up a link in the food chain, Yellowstone's grizzly bear and mountain lion populations would be the obvious beneficiaries of an increase in winterkill among the grazing animals, according to Mr. Varley. "
Mark Palmer, the chairman of the Sierra Club's national wildlife committee, sees another virtue in the aftermath of a fire: "Meadows are much more valuable to wildlife than dense forests.
"
Gerald M. Freeman, the president and chief operating officer of Stone Forest Industries Inc., agrees: "Controlled burning, selective logging and reforestation are a much better way to manage the forests."
For the first five years after a fire, while surrounding vegetation is still relatively low, there will be a proliferation of wildflowers in the park, she says.
Mr. Despain joined the park's research department in 1971 after finishing his doctorate at the University of Alberta on the plants of the Bighorn Mountains in northern Wyoming.
Almost everything in sight is black, from the tips of trees 40 feet above the ground to the powdered ash blanketing the earth.
Then the forest thins as it ages, trees fall, underbrush grows, and the forest is primed for a fire to start its life cycle over again.
Reforestation would give wooded areas in Yellowstone a "five-year jump" on natural regrowth of the woods and would "get it green again," says John Davis, Willamette Industries Inc.'s general manager for Western timber logging operations in Lewiston, Idaho.
As lodgepoles come to dominate the ecosystem, other plant species decline in number, reaching a low of no more than a dozen in the mature forest.
Ecologically, there's no down side to the fire," he adds, conceding that similar statements by park officials may have sounded cavalier when the fires were raging.
The National Park Service has already been at the center of a much-publicized political firestorm over its 16-year-old "natural burn" policy, which allows lightning-caused fires to burn themselves out, except where they threaten towns or park buildings.
Alston Chase, an author and park critic, describes Mr. Despain as one of the park's "most orthodox believers" in the official natural management policy.
He worked under Glen Cole, the park's head of research from 1968 to 1976 and a leading advocate of letting natural processes prevail in the park.
Among the new arrivals may be the three-toed and blackbacked woodpeckers, the mountain blue bird and the Western wood phoebe.
Where many people recoil at the sweep of nature's destructive power, the 47-year-old Mr. Despain marvels at the tiny steps life is already taking to renew itself.
Insects begin attacking the snags almost immediately after a fire, and the charred trunks are likely to be toppled by the wind.
In an average year, 2.5 million tourists visit the huge park, and a drop-off because of the fire damage could severely hurt business.
The tiny seeds are slowly released from rock-hard pine cones only after the cones have been seared by the passing flames; indeed, they require a fire to propagate themselves.
Seeds that have been dormant for decades beneath the soil appear to be triggered by the passing fire, he says, and will germinate next spring.
The mature forest "has the least biological diversity of any habitat in the park," Mr. Varley says.
With their roots undamaged by the flames, aspen trees return to their juvenile phase for three to four years, and will add as much as four feet in a 90-day growing season.
Yellowstone's elk and bison herds, as well as moose, should benefit from the additional forage in the park next year.
It's too early to tell whether the fires, which burned some lower pastures, affected the herds' ability to weather Yellowstone's long winter.
In recent years, environmentalists have for the most part succeeded in promoting the natural processes of the parks.
Three to five additional bird species are likely to migrate into Yellowstone next year, attracted to the new plants and insects thriving in the meadows.
Grasses and shrubs, some of their seeds having lain dormant for 100 years or more, fill in the open spaces between the trees.
"Fires have been an integral force in the Yellowstone ecosystem for the past 10,000 years since the glaciers left," Mr. Varley says.
His eyes red from the blowing ash, Mr. Despain patiently counts the quarter-inch lodgepole pine seed "wings" within a rectangular frame he places on the hillside.
In addition to fireweed and wild geraniums, lupen, yarrow, mountain dandelion and arnica have already been spotted this year among the ashes.
The emotional appeal of replanting the parks already has led to some reforestation proposals -- some of them a bit off the wall.
Mr. Despain hopes that the scientific evidence that park researchers are gathering will testify to the forest's ability to renew itself, while countering emotional calls for human help.
There has yet to be a confirmed report of a large animal killed by the flames, although a few deaths are almost inevitable, park officials say.
But many snags, weathering to fence-post gray, will remain as monuments to the fire of 1988 for years to come.
As Yellowstone National Park's research biologist, he has already begun to monitor the forest's rebirth from the worst fire on record.
Memories of Bambi and Smokey the Bear notwithstanding, Yellowstone's large animals don't appear to have suffered from the fire.
Next year, the ground cover replacing the park's burnt stands of aging lodgepole pines should provide a 30-fold increase in plant species.
These and the rest of the park's thermal features remain unscathed by the fires.
So far, Mr. Mott, who didn't return calls for comment, doesn't appear in danger of losing his job, park service officials say.
In addition to his seed-counting, Mr. Despain has created nine "before and after" study plots to gauge effects of the fire.
The little wings act like the rotary blades of a helicopter in dispersing the seeds.
The last fire to rival this year's in intensity roared across much of Yellowstone in the early 1700s.
Aspen trees, whose paper-white bark and yellow leaves punctuate the evergreen forests this time of year, also thrive after a fire.
At that point, the pines -- still less than 15 feet tall -- begin to choke off light reaching the forest floor as their limbs grow together.
The park service is under unwelcome political pressure to feed the herds if the winter is severe.
