Rising welfare spending has been a significant factor in the averageincrease in net state borrowing of 3 percentage points of GDP across theOECD between 1989 and 1992.In the longer term, there are fears that the cost of the welfare state couldbecome insupportable as populations age over the next 50 years.
Thenumber of over-65s in the 24 OECD member states rose from 61m in 1960 tomore than 100m in 1990.The growth is accelerating, with the number projected to rise to more than115m in 2000, 131m in 2010 and 156m by 2020.
For the OECD as a whole,the age dependency ratio is predicted to rise from about 19 per cent in 1990to 28 per cent by 2020 and 37 per cent by 2040.Some countries face much greater pressures from the ageing of theirpopulations than others.
Average government debt in OECD countrieshas risen from 23 per cent of GDP in 1979 to 44 per cent in 1992.Without either tax rises or cuts in welfare budgets, current welfarespending plans could increase debt ratios on average by 90 percentage pointsover the next 40 years, according to one OECD study.
But the OECD has also drawn attention to the need for action to anticipatethe funding implications of the rise in the number of elderly people.
Most OECD countries have recognised the need to curb growth in these mainareas of welfare spending during the 1980s, and have introduced policies totackle the underlying causes.
Introduction:
The welfare state, the glue that binds the social fabric of the world'sadvanced capitalist economies, is coming unstuck.
The strain that this will put on the welfare state can best be seen byrelating it to expected trends in the number of people of working age.
As countries become wealthier, moving the boundary between the state'sresponsibilities and those of the individual in this way may be a naturalstep.
Expenditure has risen rapidly in recent decades,more than doubling its average share of GDP in OECD countries since 1960.Pensions typically account for about a quarter of the increase in publicexpenditure over this period.
In both countries, ratios will peak at about 33 per cent in 2040.The most immediate impact of these demographic changes will be on pensions,where costs will in any case rise as pension schemes continue to mature.
Throughout the OECD, for example, the number of lone-parentfamilies has been rising since the 1960s.
The immediate cause is itsincreasing cost at a time when budget deficits burden most of the 24 memberstates of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The welfarestate may have effectively bound societies together through the ups anddowns of the economic cycle for the past 40 years.
This is the first in a series of articles analysing the pressures on thewelfare state across the world, and examining policy options for relievingthe strain
Age dependency ratios will climb more slowly in the UK and US, to about 25per cent in 2020 - four people of working age to support every elderlyperson.
Thestandard measure for this is the age dependency ratio, the population over65 as a percentage of the population aged 15-64.
Over the past two decades,jobless levels have risen during recessions but not fallen back to the sameextent in the following recovery period.
Although there are considerabledifferences between national health systems, healthcare reforms in countriessuch as the UK and the Netherlands are increasingly converging on modelsthat use competition and price incentives to control costs.
Germany and Japan, for example, will both have agedependency ratios of 34 per cent by 2020 - one person over the age of 65 forevery three people between 15 and 64.
Where the cost of welfare is jointly funded by employers -as in Germany - higher contributions are also increasingly resisted bybusiness, which fears the consequences for international competitiveness ofhigher costs.
At the other extreme, the increase hasexceeded 50 per cent in the UK and Australia.
Rising unemployment has added to the cost of the welfare state in bothunemployment benefits and general family support for low-income families.
The growth is largely attributable to three factors:The increase in coverage as pension schemes introduced after the secondworld war mature.
Real economic growth rates of up to 1.5 per cent a year wouldbe needed to pay for pensions alone - and that on the assumption that thepensions do not increase in real terms.
Total government spending in the OECD countries hasrisen from 28.1 per cent of GDP in 1960 to 43.8 per cent in 1990.
The ageing of the population has alsocontributed to rising costs, though not as much as for pensions.
While short-term measures may ease the immediate budgetary pressures, morefundamental reforms will be needed if the welfare state is not to underminethe economic performance that has underpinned its enormous expansion sincethe second world war.
This ratchet effect has worried the Group of Seven leading industrialcountries sufficiently for an employment summit to be hosted by PresidentClinton in the coming months.
The maturing of the welfare state is also a significant factor in thedoubling of health expenditure since 1960.
But what most concerns those responsible for public financesis the strength of underlying pressures on welfare spending that will pushcosts upwards in the future.
In some countries, the increasehas been relatively moderate - 20 per cent or less in countries such asFrance, Japan and Switzerland.
As with pensions, health systems have become more generous in the wake ofeconomic growth - for example, including grafts and transplants that werepreviously regarded as experimental.
From providing support 'from the cradle to the grave', itwould become a safety net for those who could not afford to provide forthemselves.
And the demandsput on the welfare state might be eased by encouraging more privateprovision of pensions and healthcare.
Thebiggest element in this growth has been the cost of pensions, healthcare,unemployment benefits and family support.
The reasons for the growth include the greater ease of separation anddivorce.
Significant cuts in benefit levels, for example, may be needed - includinggreater targeting of benefits on the most needy.
Reform of national welfare systems to bring costs under control is now onthe political agenda throughout the OECD, as countries struggle to rein ingovernment spending.
Germany, theUK, France, Italy and the US are among countries that have already raisedtax and social security contribution levels.
The OECD's immediate priorities for reform include charges forthe use of some welfare services and greater competition to increase theefficiency of those services.
This will be encouraged by social changes, such asthe decline of the extended family in which older people were cared for byyounger relatives.
However, raising pensions by more than prices would either require muchhigher growth rates or higher taxes for those in work to pay the bill.
Measures such as these would fundamentally change the nature of the welfarestate, however.
However, there will be an increase in demand for geriatric care and socialservices for the elderly.
