[Box, p 7]Jovanovic: "Slovenia Must Excuse Itself"  "
In order to enter the process of normalization of relations with Slovenia, certain conditions must be fulfilled first," Vladislav Jovanovic, FRY minister of foreign affairs, said in a statement for POLITIKA, and added: "First it is necessary for Slovenia to excuse itself for the rude and impertinent move it made a year ago in refusing the Yugoslav offer of recognizing Slovenia.
In the view of Slovene political commentators, the softening of the Slovene attitude toward the FRY is a part of the diplomatic tactics the aim of which is to adapt Slovene policy to the policy of the European Union, with which Slovenia is awaiting negotiations about associate membership.
At the beginning of December 1993, Mr. Peterle, the Slovene minister of foreign affairs, made that attitude concrete in a letter to Warren Christopher, the U.S. secretary of state, in which he wrote: "A possible removal of the sanctions against Yugoslavia is being fully considered since the aims for which they were introduced have not been achieved....
Yugoslav diplomats have the impression that there are differences between Milan Kucan, the president of Slovenia, Lojze Peterle, the minister of foreign affairs, and Janez Drnovsek, the prime minister, the last being "sober, realistic and trustworthy."
The first signs of a change in the Slovene attitude toward Yugoslavia were noticed during the visit of Karolos Papoulias, the Greek foreign minister, and Vaclav Havel, the Czech president, to Slovenia, in November 1993.
The establishing of relations between the two states, the exchange of diplomatic representatives, and the abolition of the visa requirement for Yugoslav citizens are some of the topics to be considered.
Single statements and "diplomatic pirouettes" are not enough to overcome the present differences, including the Slovene attitude toward Kosovo, the interruption of economic relations, the way Slovene independence was achieved by force, and diplomatic duels on the international scene.
I am now speaking about the official Slovene attitude, not about the attitudes of all the politicians, and especially not about the attitudes of the Slovene people."
The announcement about the normalization of relations were also supported by information that an official Slovene delegation had arrived in Belgrade for this purpose, but it was stated that the details cannot yet be published since the matter is very delicate.
In the focus of Serbian attention now are relations with Croatia, and as far as Slovenia is concerned, the official proposal for the normalization of relations has to be specified first.
Official Belgrade has not forgotten "the extremist, anti-Serbian statements issued by Milan Kucan in Albania" or the moves made by Slovene statesmen who "instead of soothing the passions, stirred them up, always to Serbia's disadvantage."
Although the establishment of communications between Ljubljana and Belgrade would be very important for the situation in the former Yugoslavia in general, the chances that this could happen soon are minimal.
Kucan said that "Slovenia never had any conflict with Serbia," and Peterle that "Slovenia would be happy if the conditions for the removal of the sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro were fulfilled."
Introduction:
In the view of Yugoslav diplomats, the normalization of relations between Slovenia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will certainly be a strenuous and long-term project.
It is further necessary that the anti-Serbian campaign that Slovenia has been spreading all over the world is ended and that it acknowledges that those who remained in Yugoslavia have the right to self- determination.
This information has not been denied and, apart from that, it is the logical conclusion to a series of statements issued by Slovene politicians, which pointed to a change in relations toward Belgrade.
Yugoslav sources claim that Slovenia is becoming increasingly isolated because of its extreme policy toward Yugoslavia, so that this might be one of the reasons why it has decided to "soften" its attitudes toward Yugoslavia.
It is assumed in the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs that Slovene businessmen might even be checking the atmosphere for possible political contacts, but there have been no official statements about it.
We are, of course, interested in normal relations between Slovenia and Yugoslavia, but some prerequisites have to be fulfilled," Jovanovic concluded his statement.
Slovenia is the former Yugoslav republic that made the greatest effort to harm the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
In addition, Slovenia supports the lifting of the arms embargo on the Bosnia- Herzegovina Muslims.
After reporters remarked that this relatively negative attitude might negate the unofficial signal from Ljubljana, a Yugoslav diplomat said: "We do not think that there is only one opinion in Slovenia about Yugoslavia.
We cannot account for the hostility that they have shown toward Yugoslavia and toward the people who are living in this region now.
Belgrade diplomats agree with this assessment and claim that the first announcement of possible contacts between Yugoslavia and Slovenia were made by arrangement with Germany and Austria.
