Do theyrealize that America's gun-control movement sprouted from thesoil of Roger B. Taney, the racist chief justice who wrotethe infamous Dred Scott decision of 1857?In the early part of the 19th century, Dred Scott, a blackslave, had been taken by his owner from Missouri, a slavestate, to Illinois, a free state.
And all of this would be done in theface of the subject race of the same color, both free andslaves, and inevitably producing discontent andinsubordination among them, and endangering the peace andsafety of the state.
Scott appealed to the federalcourts, since the person he was actually suing, John Sanford,the executor of the estate that owned Scott, lived in NewYork.
It was this change in the status of the black man, fromslave to freeman, that caused racist elements in the country(North and South) to agitate for restrictions on guns --ignoring long established customs and understanding of theSecond Amendment.
The 14th and 15th Amendments to the Constitution, alongwith the various Reconstruction civil rights acts, preventedgun prohibitionists from making laws that were explicitlyracist and that would overtly deny black people the right tobear arms.
Throughout thehistory of New York state's Sullivan law, enacted at thestart of the 20th century, mainly the rich and powerful havehad easy access to licenses to carry handguns.
{i}t would givepersons of the negro race, who were recognized as citizens inany one state of the union, the right .
When his owner died in 1846, Scott sued in the statecourts of Missouri for his freedom, on the ground that he hadlived in free territory.
With the influx of large numbers of Irish, Italian andJewish immigrants into the country, gun laws now alsotargeted whites from the underprivileged classes ofimmigrants.
In Dred Scott Chief Justice Taney, writing for the court'smajority, stated that if blacks were "entitled to theprivileges and immunities of citizens, .
The specter of a black man with rights of afreeman, bearing arms, was too much for the early heirs ofRoger Taney to bear.
And what of the origins of the National Rifle Association,which is wrongly viewed as a racist organization by the blacksupporters of gun prohibition?
Gun-control legislation of the late 19th andearly 20th centuries, enacted at the state and local levels,were implicitly racist in conception.
Of the 27,000 handgun carry permits in New York City,fewer than 2% are issued to blacks -- who live and work inhigh-crime areas and really are in need of protection.
Some of thenotables who have received that privilege include EleanorRoosevelt, John Lindsay, Donald Trump, Arthur Sulzberger,Joan Rivers and disk jockey Howard Stern.
That black people, whether free or slave, were notcitizens of the U.S.; therefore, they had no standing incourt.2.
From there he was takeninto the Wisconsin territory, free territory above the 36 30'latitude of the Missouri Compromise.
In the post-Reconstructionperiod, when the pendulum swung back to overt racism, JusticeTaney's philosophy resurfaced.
Well known to most students of race relations is theformer attorney general and secretary of the Treasury'spre-civil war dictum that black people "being of an inferiororder" had "no right which any white man was bound torespect.
"
The end of Reconstruction signaled the return ofTaneyism -- overtly among the masses and covertly on theSupreme Court.
