The moon is 400 timessmaller than the sun, but because it is 400 times closer to theearth, the smaller body appears to cover the larger one.
On July 11, the moon will pass between the planet and the sun,abruptly swallowing midday's light, except for a weird glow on thehorizon.
Some 13,500 amateur and professional astronomers from the UnitedStates, Japan, Soviet Union, China, Canada, England, France andGermany have confirmed reservations.
But the special government commission, Eclipse 1991, is bankingon the clouds to roll in the country's financial favor.
This one will cut a swath across one of the most populousregions of the globe, turning day to night for an estimated 50million residents in 14 of Mexico's 31 states.
Posters have beenplaced in Mexico City subways promoting the event, and resortsalong the eclipse's path are scrambling to accommodate the expectedrush of tourists.
The commission bills the northwestern state of Baja CaliforniaSur as the best place to watch because the state has an average of300 cloudless days a year.
The National University is developing six half-hourdocumentaries on eclipses and 10 TV spots on the dangers of lookingat the sun, astronomy professor Jesus Galindo says.
Cuernavaca, 35 miles south of Mexico City, is hosting ageophysicists' congress during the week of the eclipse.
``It's the most important eclipse in history,'' says Miguel GilGuzman, secretary-general of the Mexican Astronomical Society.
Most hotels along the eclipse route are full for July 11.Tourism officials are seeking private homes and campgrounds,schools and auditoriums to house the influx.
The stars will comeout; the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars and Jupiter will shine.
Introduction:   Mexico, where sun worship has passed fromancient civilizations to modern beachgoers, is gearing up early forthe day next year when the sun will be blotted out.
The 165-mile-wide path will go dark for almost seven minutes,the maximum length for a total solar eclipse.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has appointed aCabinet-level commission to prepare for what astronomers bill as``the slar eclipse of the century'' on July 11.
At least one expedition plans to view the show from the17,887-foot Popocapetl volcano, the country's second-highest peak.
Rosy rays of light will shoot out around the moon's edges,forming what astronomers call a corona, or crown.
