Exxon Shipping spokesman Brian Dunphy told The Associated Pressthat the captain of the tanker Exxon Valdez, Joseph Hazelwood, wasnot on the bridge at the time of the accident and that third mateGregory Cousins was in command.
``It's Exxon's policy that in the waters that the ship waslocated in, the captain should have been on the bridge,'' Dunphysaid.
By late Sunday, Exxon officials said a total of 37,500 barrelsof oil had been transferred in the first two days of the operation,leaving more than 900,000 barrels on the ship.
The herring catch, which usually takes place in April, primarilyis for the harvest of roe, a delicacy that brings up to $25 perpound in Japan.
Weather hadbeen calm since the accident, but the National Weather Service saidthe wind was expected to increase to 25 mph and stir up a 5- to6-foot chop on the sound.
However, Exxon insisted that the area was only 10 to12 square miles, and Coast Guard officials said they were at a lossto explain the difference in estimates.
Introduction:
The tanker that caused the nation'sbiggest oil spill was being illegally piloted by its third matewhen the vessel ran aground on a reef, Exxon Shipping Co. saidSunday.
An experiment to assess the possibility of burning off the oilwas completed early Sunday and the Coast Guard said Exxon officialswere ``cautiously optimistic.''
The 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez, carrying 1.2 million barrelsof North Slope crude oil loaded at Valdez, ran onto a reef 25 milesfrom the port early Friday after swinging out of a traffic lane toavoid ice.
There is a full investigation that will occur on the incident,''Dunphy said, adding that the captain is consulting with an attorney.
The CoastGuard said it ordered the closure to prevent pollution from beingcarried to Valdez on vessels passing through the oil.
Estimates put the spill at 240,000 barrels of oil, or about 10.1million gallons, making it the biggest U.S. spill on record.
However, the wind and waves may make it more difficult to skimoil off the water, said Coast Guard Lt.
Ed Wieliczkiewicz.
The ship's captain and twobridge crew members, including Cousins, were relieved of dutySaturday and subpoenaed by the NTSB.
More than four miles of floating boom had been placed in aneffort to contain the oil, the Coast Guard said Sunday.
``This oil spill may well be the greatest disaster to hit Alaskasince the Good Friday earthquake 25 years ago,'' Cowper said in anews release.
The Coast Guard said about84,000 gallons of oil an hour was being transferred; at that rate,the unloading could take seven days.
Alaska's governor, meanwhile, declared once-pristine PrinceWilliam Sound a disaster area as the toll on the waterway'sabundant wildlife began to mount.
Rick Steiner of the University of Alaska Marine Advisory Programsaid the beaches on which the herring spawn could be polluted.
Environmentalists, the governor and other top state officialshave accused Exxon and Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. of respondingtoo slowly to the spill.
The spill came at a time when Prince William Sound fishermenwere preparing for the herring season, which is followed byharvests of shellfish and salmon.
The three were administered routine tests for drug and alcoholabuse, but the results were not immediately available, officialssaid.
Exxon Shipping Co.
President Frank Iarossi said Exxon hasreviewed information gathered by divers and determined there arefive holes in the vessel's hull on the starboard side.
Ott said fishing is an economic mainstay in Cordova, more sothan in Valdez, which also draws tourists and has the oil terminal.
The Coast Guard estimated the area affected by the spill at 100square miles.
The Coast Guard said the slickand patches of oil separated from it were spread over an area ofabout 100 square miles.
Many are concerned they will get only minimal harvests becauseof the oil damage, and then will face the longer-term problem ofbad publicity.
Theonly larger oil-related accident in U.S. waters was the spillingand burning of up to 10.7 million gallons of oil when two shipscollided in Galveston Bay in 1979.
The transfer of oil remaining aboard the Exxon Valdez to theExxon Baton Rouge resumed late Saturday.
Investigation of the accident was turned over to the NationalTransportation Safety Board on Sunday.
He wasn'tauthorized by the company, nor was it legal,'' she said.
``We're not ready to absorb any loss,'' said Riki Ott,spokeswoman for United Fishermen of Alaska.
Department of Interior spokeswoman Pamela Bergmann said awildlife specialist sailed in the sound Saturday and observed 75ducks and two otters coated with oil.
Valdez is at the southern end of the 800-mile Alaska oilpipeline.
Hazelwood was in his cabin atthe time of the accident, Iarossi said.
