``It's not the sort of thing to be concerned about, it would onlybe a matter of curiosity and interest because the fires are stillunder suppression orders and they would be mopped up and put outimmediately
, I'm sure,'' said Norum, who is based at the BoiseInteragency Fire Center in Idaho.
``I'm going to do my scrapbooks,'' she said, hauling out fromunderneath a counter a huge cardboard box overflowing with newspaperclippings and official fire bulletins, among them a firefighters'newsletter, ``The Griz Gazette,'' purporting to have spotted ElvisPresley on the fire line.
``The first thing most people around here did was go onvacation,'' said Patti Smith, owner with her husband, Bob, of theBearclaw Service and Cabins, a gas station and small motel.
For two months last summer the citizens of Cooke City and itstiny suburb, Silver Gate, were showcased on the nightly TV news andsplashed across the front pages of the nation's newspapers as forestfires threatened to burn them out.
Because of the unprecedented fire season which burned nearly 1.5million acres in the greater Yellowstone ecosystem, including705,000 acres within the national park, Mrs. Smith and her friendsand neighbors worry about what's happening underneath the blanket ofsnow this winter.
The U.S. Forest Service, which coordinatedsome of its firefighting efforts from Cooke City, set up shop nearthe photocopy machine, and everybody who had information or wasseeking some crammed into the Smiths' log cabin office.
Theonly grocery store is on its winter schedule, open just Fridaythrough Monday, and many curio shops are shut up tight, but theBearclaw cabins and most of the other motels are open for wintersports enthusiasts.
Although postmistress Vicky Menuey keeps the office open fivedays a week, mail only arrives to ZIP code 59020 from the outsideworld on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.
In his 18 years of studying wildfires, Norum has come acrossseveral incidents where wildfires buried themselves in the roots oftrees and grasses and smoldered all winter only to pop up throughthe snow in the spring.
The second time the sirens went off and we hadto leave, my parents had just arrived from North Platte, Neb., so weall went to Red Lodge (Mont.
Introduction:
The new year ushers in a new wildfireseason, an unwelcome thought to the residents of this small Montanatourist town on the northeastern corner of Yellowstone National Park.
It's snowmobiling season now, and clubs from as far away asCanada and Illinois are booked into Cooke City's motels to takeadvantage of the beautiful scenery and 80 miles of trails in thearea.
The Smiths, who own the only photocopy machine for 30 miles inevery direction, found their small gas station and convenience storea mecca during the fires.
Their economically critical summer tourist season a bust and thehunting season crippled, the folks of Silver Gate and Cooke Citystraggled home in mid-September to pick up the pieces.
When the snow melts in May, the Yellowstone country will providean answer to a question troubling lots of people whose lives werechanged by the wildfires of '88.
Rod Norum, a fire behavior analyst with the National ParkService, said he would not be surprised if pockets of fire are foundin the greater Yellowstone area come spring.
Although the 5.9 million acresburned in 1988 did not match the 28 million acres destroyed in 1926,the $583.8 million spent to fight 75,000 fires set a record.
Nearly four feet of snow has piled up against the Smiths' cabinsand ``
that's just the way
I like it
,'' exulted Mrs. Smith.
The hottesttape in Cooke City this winter is ``Three Men and a Baby,'' forwhich
there's a waiting list.
The state pays Bob Smith, 34, to groom the trails.
Pinched between the Storm Creek and Clover-Mist blazes, anestimated 150 seasonal residents and dozens of tourists wereevacuated twice while hundreds of firefighters faced down walls offlame which threatened annihilation.
Eventually, millions ofdollars, thousands of man hours, and an early autumn snowfall savedthe towns.
No structures were lost within the towns' boundaries, but sevenresidences and five outbuildings were destroyed in the area.
Winter now cloaks Cooke City and Silver Gate, and only about 70year-round residents remain to weather the below-zero months.
``Business was way down this fall because we didn't have thehunters, but we got a lot of curious weekenders from Cody andBillings who wanted to see how bad it was.''
