A coalition of center-right parties formed a new government lastmonth in Slovenia, the most prosperous of Yugoslavia's sixrepublics, after trouncing reform Communists in the first freestate elections held in Communist-ruled Yugoslavia in 45 years.
The media said a joint session of the republic's 240-seatlegislature voted unanimously to adopt the Declaration ofSovereignty of the State of Slovenia.
The Ljubljana nightly television news said the declaration askedSlovenian authorities to ``assume control over units of the(Yugoslav) armed forces stationed on Slovenian territory,'' andsaid a 30 percent cut in defense spending would be implemented.
The document said Slovenia should adopt a new democraticconstitution within the next 12 months, but made no mention ofearlier calls for the republic to secede from the troubled Yugoslavfederation.
Introduction:
The lawmakers who replaced theCommunists as leaders of the prosperous northern republic ofSlovenia have proclaimed the state's full sovereignty, but stoppedshort of calling for secession.
The adoption of a declaration of sovereignty has been underdiscussion in the new Parliament since the new government wasinstalled in May.
The timing of Monday's proclamation by Slovenia may have beenaffected by Serbia's sudden decision last week to hold a specialreferendum Sunday and Monday on adopting consitutional reforms thatwould virtually destroy any remaining autonomy for its troubledprovince of Kosovo.
The Slovenian declaration also said police should take overcontrol of frontiers with neighboring Italy and Austria, replacingborder guards deployed for the past 45 years by Yugoslavia'sCommunist government, Ljubljana TV said.
Slovenia's president, Milan Kucan, has said that Sloveniaintends to proclaim sovereignty as part of its drive for liberalpolitical and economic reform in Yugoslavia.
In Kosovo's capital of Pristina, after Serbian police on Mondaybarred about 100 ethnic Albanian deputies from entering theprovince's Parliament, about 40 deputies proclaimed Kosovo equal tothe six Yugoslav republics.
Monday's parliamentary declaration provides for establishing anindependent legal system that would take precedence over federallaws and for Slovenian control over armed forces stationed in therepublic, state media said.
Premier Lojze Peterle and other Slovenian leaders also saySlovenia should take urgent steps to join the European Community,no matter what Yugoslavia's Communist-ruled southern states say.
