In explaining that interest, the court recognized that"there must be a substantial regulation of elections {by thestates} if they are to be fair and honest," and if some sortof order is to accompany the democratic process.
As recentlyas June of this year, the Supreme Court again reiterated thatthe states have reserved to themselves, via the TenthAmendment, "the power to regulate elections.
"Elsewhere, the court in 1988 ruled in South Carolina v.
Baker, that certain "extraordinary defects in the nationalpolitical process might render congressional regulation ofstate activities invalid under the Tenth Amendment."
Should the court rule against term limits by the states,numerous other ballot access restrictions will likely bepassed that have many of the same effects as term limits.
In its 1972 decision Bullock v. Carter and again in its1982 decision Clements v. Fashing, the U.S. Supreme Courtdetermined that a particular candidate has no "fundamental"right to ballot access or to run for office.
Manylawyers and political scientists say no, arguing that neitherCongress nor the states may add to the age, citizenship andresidency qualifications set forth in the Constitution.
They argued that voters were denied theright to be represented by the same legislator indefinitely,and that term limits discriminated against incumbents anddenied them their right to equal protection of the laws.
Consequently, the argument that term limits are"qualifications" just like those already in the Constitution-- and that therefore they can be added only by amending theConstitution -- isn't particularly convincing.
The Supreme Court has long held that the power to ensure afair electoral system, truly responsive representation inCongress and a high degree of citizen participation inelections rests with the states.
Where the incumbent is almost the pre-ordained winner in anelection, there is no effective competition of ideas orcandidates and incumbents are less responsive to the will
ofthe electorate.
On this basis, term limits merely ensure afair election system and the "republican form of government"guaranteed the states under the Constitution.
Forexample, the 1972 decision in Dillon v. Fiorina struck down aNew Mexico law requiring candidates entering a congressionalprimary to have belonged to their party for a year and to paya registration fee.
Moreover, term limits do not in any way modify the age,residency or citizenship requirements in the Constitution.
Thecourt said the "state's strong interests in protectingagainst an entrenched, dynastic legislative bureaucracy"outweighed objections that term limits restrict voter choiceat the ballot box.
State statutes that bar first-time candidates from runningfor Congress have been held to add to the qualifications setforth in the Constitution and have been invalidated.
They claimed there isa "fundamental right to be a candidate for public office,"which they found among the "associational rights" in theFirst Amendment.
States could allow an incumbent who has served a set numberof years in the same office to run again, but only as a"write-in" candidate.
Thecourt has not defined what it means by "extraordinarydefects," but surely the fact that 98% of House incumbentsare routinely re-elected and that one out of five incumbentsran with no major-party opposition in 1990 might qualify.
Brown, the Supreme Court upheld a California law thatprohibited an independent candidate from running for Congressbecause he had changed his registration to Independent lessthan 11 months before the election.
The Supreme Court has foundthat clause violated only in those cases where ballot accessrestrictions discriminate against the poor and against new,small or independent party candidates.
Three U.S.House members, led by Democrat Larry Smith, have filed briefsasking the court to rule state term limits unconstitutional.
By 6 to 1, the California Supreme Court ruled this monththat the state's new term-limit law was constitutional.
Florida's attorney general hasasked its state Supreme Court for an advisory opinion on aterm-limit initiative that would limit the state's members ofCongress to eight consecutive years in office.
Likewise, term limits do not violate the Equal ProtectionClause of the 14th Amendment.
Unlike the age, residency and citizenship requirements,term limits do not prevent any non-incumbent from running forCongress.
Introduction:If Washington state imposes term limits on itscongressional delegation Tuesday, the issue of whether or notsuch limits are constitutional will take center stage.
The answer would appear on the ballot so voterswould know a candidate's views on term limits.
The constitutionality of such state term limits may,however, be tested next month.
Therefore,they do not deprive voters of the freedom to associate withcandidates based on their viewpoint or with any particularparty.
