``An arson case in the forest is very hard to make,'' he said.``When you go out in the middle of the forest to a blackened areato begin an investigation, it's very difficult and frustrating.
In the rare case of a conviction, the arsonist is likely to beput on probation or ordered to pay the costs of fighting the fireand replacing timber that was destroyed, Smallwood said.
A policy of open grazing, with cattle free to feed on anyunfenced land, was allowed in the Ozarks until the 1960s, longerthan in other wooded areas, Smallwood said.
Aesthetics even played a part:
Shea and other researchers foundthat people living in areas where arson was common enjoyed thesmell of smoke in the spring air, and believed the woods lookedbetter ``burned clean.''
As one of the Forest Service's 125 special law enforcementagents, Smallwood has spent most of the past 16 years investigatingfires in the forests he loves.
But the tradition of using fire to manage the woods dies hard.``There's no cut-and-dried way to prevent it,'' McDonald said.
``You eliminate all those causes, you're down to arson,'' saidDale Smallwood, a criminal investigator for Missouri's Mark TwainNational Forest.
A total of 14,200 acres of the forest, which covers 1.5million acres mostly in southern Missouri, were burned during aspring fire season made more volatile by drought.
``We had an employee die of a heart attack fighting an arsonfire,'' Smallwood said, referring to a 1976 blaze.
Subsistence farmers in the rural South who were interviewed byShea and his researchers claimed fire helped control ticks, snakesand disease and controlled the encroachment of trees on land wherethey wanted to graze cattle.
He comes down to arson in most of his investigations _ and heand other forest officials believe the problem is often rooted insome regional traditions that are as hard to quell as flames.
His military-neat office at the Forest Service headquarters inRolla is decorated with game bird feathers, a picture of SmokeyBear and a glass-doored bookcase lined with reports and text books.
``In thespringtime, people used to burn the woods to allow grass to grow.''
On average, Smallwood estimates, 70 percent of the forest fireseach year in Missouri are deliberately set.
``We had one case (in 1984) where two men went to Sunday schooland after school they started a fire with their Sunday schoolliterature,'' Smallwood said.
McDonald, who oversees about 125 Mark Twain employees trained asfirefighters, said forest fires cost $25 to $30 an acre to suppress.
``It's probably 90 percent higher than the national average,''said Ron McDonald, Mark Twain's fire control officer.
Arsonists set 172 of the 296 Mark Twain fires that have brokenout so far this year, burning more than 9,000 acres, Smallwoodsaid.
The tradition seems to stretch across the southern UnitedStates, according to Smallwood.
Smallwood's job includes investigatingmarijuana growing in the forest, timber theft and theft of otherfederal property.
``Part of the problem is people driving around drinking andshooting road signs,'' Smallwood said.
Introduction:
A split, charred tree stump is a clue thatlightning was to blame for a forest fire.
Still, the arsonist does not always fit the profile of a simplymisguided citizen.
Beyond the cost in dollars of forest fires, there's risk tothose who fight them.
``It just costs a lot of moneyto put these fires out and it's coming right out of our taxdollars.''
Over the years, timber has been touted as a cash crop that is asworthy of protection as grassland.
The Forest Service has attempted to counter the lore that canlead to burning.
