Sheets, who was acting director during the 1987 Atlantichurricane season and was named director in March, spent most of themorning on the sixth floor of hurricane headquarters beside a largemonitor showing the destructive Hurricane Gilbert sprawled acrossmuch of the western Caribbean.
Gilbert was being compared to the hurricane of 1935, whichslammed into the Florida Keys and killed 600 people, and HurricaneCamille, which devastated the Mississippi coast in 1969, killing256.
The transition from former Director Neil Frank, widely known forhis distinctive style and flattop haircut, to Sheets, his darkblond hair carefully coiffed and wearing a bright pink shirt with agray wool-blend jacket, has been a smooth one.
The center's 33-member crew, including seven hurricaneforecasters and specialists, are keeping a close watch of thehurricane in a large, open room of blue monitors flickering withcolor and non-color graphics.
``He knows his job very well and he's a calm personality,''Vivian Jorge, the center's budget analyst, said of Sheets.
The major television networks, local stations and newspapersmedia were on hand to monitor the hurricane, which could reach theGulf of Mexico by Thursday, said Sheets.
And while Sheets might appear to be spend most of his day withtiny microphones snaking down his back for TV interviews andfielding questions, he also writes most of the hurricane advisoriesissued every three hours and makes hurricane forecasts.
``This would be considered a `Great Hurricane,' '' said Sheets.``It's certainly in the top 10 percent as far as intensity, sizeand destructive potential.''
And interest in Gilbert has been high since it started packinghurricane-force winds over the weekend and by Tuesday afternoonbecame a Category 5 storm with winds of 160 mph and a centralpressure of 26.66 inches.
Introduction:   Dealing with his first major hurricaneas director of the National Hurricane Center
, Bob Sheets wasn'tskipping a beat Tuesday as a multitude of reporters
fired questionsat him.
The last major hurricane to make landfall was Elena in 1985,along the Mississippi, Alabama and Florida Panhandle.
A Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson scale of strengthhas winds in excess of 155 mph and pressure less than 27.17 inchesand has the potential for causing catastrophic damage.
