``I ... do not support racism or police brutality, nor do thevast majority of the citizens of Long Beach, and we're a caring,thinking community and it disturbed us very much to see the tape,''he said.
Since the incident apparently was timed by Jackson to coincidewith the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. the confrontationshould be considered ``nothing short of timed sensationalism at therisk of serious injury to all of the parties involved,'' Stonebrakersaid.
Now, it is brought to your living roomin living color,'' said Frank Berry, president of the Long Beachchapter of the National Association for the Advancement of ColoredPeople.
``As a police chief,'' he added, ``I do not for one minutecondone the unlawful use of force or police brutality.''
``I submit that if Mr. Jackson had stayed in the vehicle, as didthe driver, this incident would not have occurred,'' HawthornePolice Chief Kenneth R. Stonebraker said at a news conference Monday.
The 30-year-old Jackson, who has been on a stress-relateddisability leave from his Hawthorne job for 22 months, contends theincident is typical of a pattern of racism by white officers in theLos Angeles area.
``I'm deeply concerned since it strikes me as a period whenpolice violence and excessive force is rampant,'' said MarkRidley-Thomas, executive director of the Southern ChristianLeadership Conference's Los Angeles chapter.
Curt Livesay, an assisant Los Angeles County
district attorneyand head of the office's Special Investigations Division, will leadthe probe, said district attorney spokesman Andy Reynolds.
``We're certainly not happy to have an incident like thisoccurring, but we need all the information,'' said Councilman ThomasJ.
Don Jackson, said he set upthe self-styled ``sting'' in Long Beach to expose alleged policeracism in the Los Angeles area.
Long Beach, about 20 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, hasabout 450,000 people, including a sizeable black population.
Jackson was riding as a passenger with Jeffrey Hill, a30-year-old off-duty state corrections officer, when they werepulled over allegedly for straddling lanes, which they denied.
``I'm more so offended since the Hawthorne Police Department,which has no jurisdiction, is making judgment.''
He has a disability lawsuit pending, has filedracism complaints against the department and conducted a similarpersonal sting operation against Los Angeles police.
Introduction:
The City Council today asked countyprosecutors to investigate the conduct of a white policeman who wassecretly filmed while he pushed an off-duty black policeman througha plate-glass window.
Jackson said he chose Long Beach police because of complaints tothe Police Misconduct Lawyer's Referral Service of Los Angeles.
David Lynn of the referral service said 50 misconduct complaintswere filed with his group against the Long Beach police.
The officer unleashed a stream of profanity and roughed upJackson after he demanded to know why he was being searched.
``I had already had my hands up and was turned to the windowand he slammed my face in it.''
``The officer simply used violence,'' Jackson said Monday.
Long Beach Mayor Ernie Kell said on NBC's ``Today'' show thismorning that he was disturbed by the videotape.
During an argument, Long Beach Officer Mark Dickey orderedJackson to face a building and put his hands behind his head.
OK, no problem,'' saidJackson on the videotape.
