The price includes round-trip airfare, four days and three nights at the Grotto Bay Beach hotel (per person,based on double occupancy), full breakfasts and dinners, a welcome cocktailparty and post-race parties and discounts.
Lebow has run in 32 marathons, including London, Paris, Rome,Stockholm, Iceland, Seoul and Vienna.
"The cities aredifferent, but most marathons include a carbo-loading pasta party the nightbefore, medical exams, a post-race celebration, commemorative T-shirts andawards to finishers.
"Most marathons take you through cities, so you geta chance to see things you'd never see on a sightseeing bus," said Fred Lebow,president of the New York Roadrunner's Club and director of the New YorkMarathon.
IF YOU'RE INTERESTEDIf you're interestedin combining a vacation and marathon, here are some firms to contact:;   Marathon Tours, 108 Main St., Charlestown, Mass.
"Amarathon, says the same source, is "a footrace of 26 miles, 385 yards, runover an open course."
(8OO)
6MY-TOUR.Sports Tours International, 91 Walkdon Rd., Walkdon, Worslay, Manchester M285DQ, United Kingdom.
Some marathons, like Portland's, include additional races: afive-mile run, a five-mile walk and a kids run.
Running 26 miles just to see a city definitely isn'tfor everyone, but at the very least, it's a way to kill two birds with onestone.
Running coach Pat Savage and Hal Higdon, a senior writer forRunner's World, are taking a group to Ireland in June.
London, the most popular European city to visit, holds the world's largestmarathon (April 12 next year).
In the recent Chicago Marathon, a German man ran with a camera,snapping photos every few miles.
England has similarorganizations: Sports Tours International and Keith Prowse, a company thatspecializes in British theater, sports and concert tours.
(617) 242-7845.Roadrunner Tours, 2815 Lake Shore Dr., Michigan City, Ind.
The eight-day trip willleave from Chicago and will include sightseeing, guided runs and a fun runfrom Malahide Castle to Swords.
"The most exciting thing is the startof the race," he said.
Vacation,according to Webster, means "freedom from any activity; rest; respite.
But it isn'tnecessary to run 26.2 miles to go on a running vacation, especially if it's afamily trip.
Inaddition to air fare and hotel, runners are guaranteed spots in restrictedentry races such as the London Marathon.
