Introduction:
The brutal beating of Rodney Glen King by Los Angelespolicemen offers convincing evidence that a code of silenceexists within that department, but it also illustrates asimilar reluctance of the nation's police chiefs to criticizea fellow chief.
Or was thechief suggesting that the beating was a warning againstfurther run-ins with the police?Clearly, Daryl Gates's words and actions create doubtabout his claim that the Rodney King incident was anaberration.
Mr.
Gates's military style of policing is at odds withthat in the rest of the country, and it's about time policeleaders publicly repudiated it.
And it hardly reduced conflict in a citywhere
the majority of the population is made up of minoritieswho need and deserve police protection, whether or not theyare citizens.
Yet we, his fellow police chiefs, have for years remainedsilent about Mr. Gates, who yesterday was put on a 60-dayleave by the Los Angeles Police Commission.
Mr. Gates's statement did nothing to lessenthe tragedy of the fallen officer, but like his statementabout blacks, it gave comfort to bigots within and outsidethe department.
Mr. Gates saidthat while he was shocked, he wasn't drawing conclusions andwould look into the "background," of the incident.
He hascalled for prosecution of three of the officers, and hasproduced a videotape for his troops condemning the beating.
The Police Corps wouldsend idealistic young people, including minorities, to servea three -- or four -- year tour of duty after collegegraduation in return for federal funding of their educations.
Afew years ago Chief Gates referred to gang members as "dirtylittle cowards," and warned them that "there is resoundingapplause to every fall of the hammer."
The chief said that arresting the criminalsbefore the robberies wasn't a good idea because the courtswere so lenient.
Yet the presence of such"non-professionals" would discourage the racism and brutalityexposed by the Rodney King beating.
Public opinion polls in Los Angeles show themajority of people believe police brutality is common, andthey disapprove of the way Mr. Gates has done his job.
The unit has been allowed to continue tooperate despite its high shooting rate -- or, worse still,because of the shootings.
The unit had advance knowledge that crimeswere about to occur, but often stayed outside and letrobberies occur, even though innocent retailers and customerswere put at risk.
Mr. Gatesreluctantly admitted that the officers who did the ransackingwere wrong, but said he could understand their frustration intrying to fight drugs.
Theculture of the department that allowed the brutalizing ofRodney Glen King was created under Mr. Gates's leadership.
Mr.
Gates would have been better advised to seek communityprograms for jobs, education, elimination of prejudice andimprovement of neighborhoods.
But condemnation of misconduct and excessive force shouldhave been a constant message from the command staff beforethe brutality, and not an afterthought.
Blatant racist jokes and comments about the beating on thepolice communications system make it hard to believe thatthis was an "aberration" as Chief Daryl Gates claims.
The exchange soundedmore like one gang challenging another than a police chiefseeking to reduce conflict in the community.
But the videotape of theLAPD brutality affects the credibility of all policeofficers.
Thesecriminals in uniform would not have dared their brutality hadthey feared that any of the 17 other police officers watchingwould report their criminal actions.
Gates has made public statements clearly at odds with thenew concept of community policing, in which officers workwith citizens to improve neighborhoods and prevent crime.
Similarly, Mr. Gates vehemently opposed the Police CorpsProgram backed by other police chiefs.
Two years ago, on a national television documentary, Mr.
Gates defended a special unit that had shot many criminalsduring stakeouts.
But this kind of reasoning isforeign to a man who publicly claimed that his SWAT teamcould free the Iranian hostages.
The presence of even onepolice corps officer witness would have deterred the criminalcops.
He said that he hoped the incident might help Mr.
King to straighten out his life.
For example, Mr.
Gates once said that blacks were more susceptible than"normal people" to chokeholds.
