In order to confront the Black Group or LOD, which are nothing but Shining Path militants who sign Abimael Guzman's letters and uphold his "great decision and definition" to negotiate with the government in order to end the war, the Central Committee demands that the militants "grow stronger on the Basis for Partisan Unity [Base de Unidad Partidaria, BUP]," which is the Shining Path basic principles adopted during the 1988 Congress, and "arrange for conquering power in the midst of the people's war."
Guzman's call upon the militants in action to "abide" by the decision to hold talks with the administration in order to stop the war, and to fight those who disagree with this decision, is persistent: "Once again we warn the militants to be on guard against any desperate action, adventure, or provocation from third parties, because the goal of all this is to scuttle the proposed peace agreement.
Meanwhile, the Central Committee has acknowledged "Gonzalo's Thoughts" as the ideological basis for the "people's war," Guzman Reinoso's "leadership" and his inability to lead the party and the war from prison, and has decided to reorganize the Shining Path machine to launch a new stage of the war without Guzman.
The activities of the Black Group "go against the conclusions of the Marxist-Leninist-Maoist-Gonzalo's Thoughts First Congress (1988), the BUP, the leadership, the party, and the people's war, which means that its members have voluntarily strayed from the party."
The second point of the document of the Central Committee meeting presided over by "Feliciano" highlights the agreements of the Working Meeting of the Shining Path leadership held in August 1993, almost one year after Guzman was arrested, and during which the implementation of the agreements of the Third Plenum held in March 1992 was discussed.
To reassert the three strategies: the political strategy: to conquer power; the military strategy: the people's war, to develop the war of movements and promote arrangements for the uprising of cities; and the construction strategy: to make arrangements to conquer power in the midst of the people's war.
During the 1992 partisan meeting, it was stated that during an adverse situation the party should draft "a new plan, taking into account the experience of the past years, establish new axes, sub-axes, guidelines, and lines of action with a nationwide criteria (...), seek new ways to develop and set up strategic military plans, and establish, for example, those objectives and carry them out on an established date."
Abimael Guzman's letters to President Alberto Fujimori, the telephone conversation between Guzman and Javier Esparza Marquez (Guzman's brother-in-law, who is in charge of Shining Path's organization abroad), and the communiques released by Shining Path prisoners "are a counterrevolutionary scheme concocted by Yankee imperialists and the genocidal and traitorous dictatorship with the sinister help of the Black Group," the Central Committee concluded at its February meeting.
The Central Committee Plenum that "Feliciano" presided over in order to break away from the Black Group orders the "unleashing of a massive reassertion movement based on the BUP throughout the party, the People's Liberation Army, and among the masses of the New Power."
The Central Committee does acknowledge Guzman as its leader, and gives him credit for the ideology he devised, the so-called "Gonzalo's Thoughts," but now he is considered to be a merely decorative figure because neither the party nor the war can be led from a cell, especially when the leader is kept incommunicado and his contacts with the outside world must go through government officials.
Based on the conclusions of the Third Plenum and the Working Meeting, the Central Committee, during the meeting in February presided over by "Feliciano," reasserted "the principle of revolutionary violence as a universal law expressed in the people's war."
It added: "The short-term objective of this scheme is to win the elections, prevent the commemoration of (Mao's) centennial in December 1994, and cover up the La Cantuta affair, but the final goal is to annihilate the people's war and move ahead with their plan to murder President Gonzalo."
Under the guise of defending the party, they are undermining it and its leadership so as to bring about its defeat, by using empty rhetoric to disguise their partisan, opportunistic, and personal interests and ambitions, and by taking a blind, biased, subjective, and superficial approach to concrete reality.
Feliciano" claims that the "forged letters" sent to President Alberto Fujimori, the communiques supporting the peace agreement signed by Shining Path prisoners in Canto Grande, Chorrillos, and Yanamayo, and the statements and gestures of Osman Morote Bariionuevo and Edmundo Cox Beuzeville are all part of this plot.
The Central Committee uses several arguments to "urge the smashing of the counterrevolutionary nonsense and the misbegotten schemes of Yankee imperialism, the genocidal and traitorous dictatorship, and the Black Group:"   1.
The Black Group is made up of "infiltrators, traitors, weaklings, and old revisionists, linked directly to reactionaries," meaning Osman Morote, Elena Iparraguire, Maria Pantoja, Martha Huatay, Edmundo Cox, and others who are in touch with government representatives and prison officials.
This clearly means that the negotiators of the peace agreement no longer belong to the Shining Path because their actions openly violate the agreements, resolutions, and decisions reached at party meetings such as the Third Plenum and the Working Meeting.
During the working meeting, and in addition to approving the efforts to "step up investigations to determine the sanctions for those who are found responsible" for contributing to the arrest of Abimael Guzman, it was agreed, among other issues:   1.
The following is one of the citations chosen by the Shining Path Central Committee to uphold its decisions: "Always taking into account the glorious actions of the people's war, the people's war cannot end.
To reassert the conclusions of the Third Central Committee Plenum (March 1992), "personally presided over by President Gonzalo, whose victorious appearance revealed its glorious, historic, and momentous nature; the second most important milestone after the congress (held in 1988)."
It seems that the Third Central Committee Plenum's assessment of what was happening to the Shining Path was negative and, therefore, it was decided to unleash a fierce wave of violence in order to conceal the weaknesses of the Maoist organization.
Actions that go against principles cannot be accepted" because "it is an international communist rule that the leadership (of the party and the war) cannot be exercised from prison," and because "monstrosities like the `peace accord'(...) clash with our principles."
The first of the five points discussed during the meeting refers to "reasserting" the agreements reached during the Third Central Committee Plenum, which was held in March 1992 and headed by Abimael Guzman Reinoso.
Dincote also obtained information according to which "Feliciano" presided over the meeting, during which it was decided to start a new phase of the "people's war" as well as plan an operation to rescue Abimael Guzman, dead or alive, at any cost.
This was selected from the document entitled "To Conquer Power in the Midst of the People's War" that was drafted during the Second Shining Path Central Committee Plenum, when Guzman was still free.
The agreements reached at the Third Plenum (March 1992) and the working meeting (August 1993) must be ratified because "facts have confirmed that the position established on those occasions toward the counterrevolutionary scheme was right and proper."
The document addresses this aspect of the internal debate as: "About the Struggle Against the Counterrevolutionary Hoax and the Black Group that upholds a Right-Wing Opportunist Line (LOD)."
The Central Committee meeting that "Feliciano" presided over clearly defined its position toward Abimael Guzman Reinoso, whose ideological contribution to the people's war, called "Gonzalo's Thoughts," was acknowledged.
The 21-page police report labeled Dincote-EM-2-Lima provides a detailed analysis of the behavior of the Shining Path and the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement throughout the country.
To defend the life of "President Gonzalo" by widely preaching our ideology, by showing great courage, placing even our lives at stake, by keeping our red and invincible flag flying high, and by pursuing our unwavering objective: communism."
The five-point document issued at the end of the meeting is attached to lengthy citations of speeches by Abimael Guzman and documents signed by him that show why the war must not end.
Dincote's intelligence reports adds that the internal strife in the Shining Path has reached the level of killings among militants, so it is likely that there will be a "settling of accounts."
The leadership may be wiped out completely or partially, but those leaders who are not must and can continue carrying out plans, the struggle, the people's war.
This communique "warned against" and "denounced" the reports of "Feliciano's" Central Committee, which decided to go on with the war.
The communique emphasized the decision to put an end to the people's war: "The people's war is over.
The Dincote report, which confirmed that "Feliciano" presided over a Shining Path Central Committee meeting somewhere in Razuillca, added that it has been decided to "rescue Abimael Guzman Reinoso, dead or alive."
Intelligence agents believe that the most likely targets are "financial companies, banks, stores, and industries, in order to sow confusion among local and foreign investors."
