"Everybody is watching the dollars they have," says Allen Olson, a vice president of the National Bank of Harvey, N.D., where the drought has already halved the potential yield of the local wheat crop.
The decision by Mr. Lyng, the secretary of agriculture, to allow hay-mowing for 30 days on Conservation Reserve Program land came as farmers and ranchers in North Dakota, Minnesota and other states continued to sell off livestock in response to shortages of hay and other forage crops.
"This is probably putting a damper on one of the most optimistic years in the last eight years," says Richard Hahn, president and chief executive of an Omaha, Neb.-based farm management concern.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said that the president is "very concerned" about the drought, and "wants to make certain that everything that the federal government can do to assist will be done."
Before the drought began damaging crops this month, the year was shaping up as one of the best in the decade for rural industries that depend on farmers.
One of the biggest problems for farm banks has been that their number of loans, a major source of bank income, has shriveled as farmers paid off their debts with last year's profits.
Paul Prentice of Farm Sector Economics Associates, a forecasting concern, thinks the drought could so deplete U.S. stockpiles that the Agriculture Department would drop much of its farm crisis-era planting restrictions.
Most of the farmers who have bought land recently did so for cash, but many of the urban investors got in on credit, real estate agents say.
The drought is going to hurt us because it hurts the cattle market," says Lance Shenold, a vice president of Anadarko Bank &amp; Trust Co.
"Everybody has just kind of pulled in their horns," says Jim Frevert, vice president of Hertz Farm Management Inc., Nevada, Iowa.
President Reagan appointed an interagency group to deal with the drought and Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng authorized farmers in drought parched counties in 13 states to harvest hay on idled crop land in the government's Conservation Reserve Program.
He said that if the drought continues, industrywide tractor sales could turn flat next year instead of climbing the 5% to 6% that was originally forecast for 1989.
Before the drought we expected a very solid year" for farm lenders, says Mark Drabenstott, an economist at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
"It's already getting harder to sell farmers tractors because of the drought," says James K. Ashford, Case president and chief executive officer.
Introduction:The Reagan administration moved to deal with the worsening drought, and a top trade official said that farm export subsidies may have to be curbed.
Others, however, see little chance that recession-weary farmers would be willing to take the risk of planting fence-row to fence-row like they did a decade ago.
Bob Pfiefer, owner of a Massey-Ferguson farm equipment dealership in Sioux Falls, S.D., says he has already canceled some orders for fear that sales will soon begin dropping off.
The department said it won't allow livestock-grazing on land in the soil-conservation program, under which farmers are paid to take erodible acreage out of crop production.
Because of the drought, Iowa realtors expect land prices to rise somewhat less than the 5% to 10% they had been expecting.
Clearly, we will have to appraise very carefully the desirability of using export enhancement funds at a time when (U.S.) supplies are unpredictable," Mr. Yeutter said.
Case, the farm implement-making unit of Tenneco Inc., is considering cutting production schedules if the drought continues through July.
In Anadarko, Okla., bankers worry now that ranchers are going to make less money this year because crop damage is escalating the cost of feeding cattle. "
Nationwide, pasture conditions on June 1 were the worst they have been since 1934, according to the Agriculture Department.
At a news briefing, Special Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter warned that the administration may have to curb its so-called export enhancement program if the drought becomes even worse.
He expects sales for the rest of this year to drop 10% to 20% from the second-half of 1987.
If the drought continues, he says, "it could bring us to our knees again."
But he said the administration doesn't believe the drought will have "overall implications for the economy."
While he wouldn't predict what kind of disaster relief might be authorized, Mr. Fitzwater said the drought "certainly is going to drive up food prices.
Mr. Lyng's order covers counties where livestock-grazing and hay-mowing on so-called set-aside acres already has been authorized, and the drought's effects have been rated as "severe."
In Franklin, Tenn., implement dealer Larry Holt is slashing his fall orders by one-third, even though sales so far this year are up roughly 25%.
"I will be hurt a bit," says Mark Dadd, an economist who is buying a 420-acre farm in Missouri.
If farmers are strapped for cash this year, the effects would ripple throughout the farm economy.
This program is designed to boost farm exports by reimbursing U.S. exporters for the difference between the prices they receive for grain and other commodities in world markets and higher U.S. prices. "
Few in farming expect the drought to trigger an agricultural recession, although more farmers could go bankrupt because of it.
"I don't see us getting on a late '70s bandwagon," says Mr. Drabenstott of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
