The sun was blacked out by the shadow of the moon for up to fourminutes along a 108-mile swath that moved from the Indian Oceanacross Indonesia and the southern Philippine island of Mindanao.
Street lights switched on, and members of the Naragcas tribe, inthe city for a festival, danced in the streets to the beat of drums.
In Kurukshetra, India, an estimated 1 million pilgrims dippedinto the waters of the sacred Sannihit and Brahmsarover tanks aftera public address system
announced the start of the eclipse.
Clouds obscured the solar spectacular in Jakarta, Indonesia,Hong Kong and in the eastern Mindanao city of Davao, wherethousands of tourists and scientists had gathered to observe theeclipse.
Introduction:   Thousands of peoleprayed, cheered, danced, beat drums and observed other traditionstoday as a total eclipse of the sun darkened a wide area ofIndonesia and the southern Philippines.
In Jakarta, Wilson Sinambela of the National Institute ofAeronautics said a total eclipse was observed in several parts ofthe country, including by about 1,000 tourists in the South Sumatracapital Palembang.
Richard Fisher of the High Altitude Observatory in Boulder,Colo., said that despite scattered clouds, scientists wereconfident they had taken useful pictures of the eclipse.
In Kuala Lumpur, where a partial eclipse blocked out about 80percent of the sun, some Malaysian Hindus visited temples to prayfor protection against harm during the eclipse.
A partial eclipse was visible across a wide area of Asia as farwest as India _ including Southeast Asia, China, Japan and NewGuinea as well as parts of Australia and the Pacific islands.
He said thousands of Indonesians prayed and beat drums to heraldthe start of the eclipse, which began in southwestern Sumatrabefore heading on to the Philippines.
In Baguio City, 130 miles north of Manila, pregnant women of thelocal Ilocano community rinsed their hair during the eclipse withwater dripped from burned rice straws in a traditional ritual.
But in Davao City, 60 miles to the northeast, morning cloudssent hundreds scurrying to the airport for flights to GeneralSantos.
Scientists said the area afforded the best opportunity towitness and study the eclipse because skies are usually clear thistime of year.
But the cloud cover broke, setting off wild cheeringamong the thousands who watched the phenomenon in a scorchingtropical heat.
Officials said about 20,000 tourists and scientists from aroundthe world had come to the southern Philippines to watch theeclipse, the last one expected here for at least 50 years.
The Chinese first recorded a total solar eclipsein 2137 B.C., regarding them as signs of a battle to death betweenthe sun and the dragon.
