``Then, for the first time, we will let the SupremeCourt of the United States decide something that we need an answerto ...''
Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist forThe Associated Press, has reported on Washington and nationalpolitics for more than 25 years.
The Constitution itself says the apportionment of the House is tobe determined on the basis of ``the whole number of free persons,''excluding Indians and counting every five slaves as three persons.
Shelby's amendment says only that the secretary is to ``make suchadjustments in total population figures as may be necessary, usingsuch methods and procedures as the secretary determines feasible andappropriate'' to keep illegal aliens from being counted incongressional reapportionment.
The government made no attempt tocount them out in the redistricting process; indeed, the twoprevious administrations decided that the Constitution required thatthe census cover illegal aliens along with citizens.
Sen. Richard Shelby, D-Ala., proposed, and won, the immigrationbill amendment that is supposed to exclude illegal aliens from theredistricting process.
Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said the questionshould be put squarely to the Supreme Court.
That was amended after the Civil War to say that the apportionmentof House seats will be based on ``the whole number of persons ineach state.''
That task would be perilous politically, since it would involvetaking House seats away from some states and giving them to others,all on the basis of estimates.
The point at issue in Senate debate on a new immigration bill waswhether illegal aliens should be counted in the process that willreallocate House seats among states after the 1990 census.
Neither the original article nor the amendment mentionscitizenship in connection with apportionment, although the term``citizens'' is used in some other provisions.
The amendment was adopted after the Senate voted 58 to 41 againsta move to reject it, and 56 to 43 against scuttling it asunconstitutional.
The Senate voted one answer and, in effect, invited the SupremeCourt to decide whether it was right or wrong.
Then again, the Census Bureau maintains that notincluding them, and still coming up with an accurate 1990 populationcount, would be even more difficult.
After the 1980 census, the government estimated that there were2.57 million people in the United States illegally.
Introduction:   Simply put
, the question was who should becounted as a person and who, if anybody, should not.
The Senate has passed an immigration billincluding an amendment that would cut illegal aliens from theredistricting numbers, but it is not likely to clear Congress beforethe next year's national head count.
It would give Secretary of Commerce RobertMosbacher the assignment of adjusting the census figures so thatillegal aliens don't count for purposes of redistributing Houseseats.
But Sen. Alan K. Simpson, R-Wyo., said the people who wrote thedocuments had no concept of illegal aliens because there weren't anyin their time.
``A census of only legalresidents cannot be done as accurately as a census of allresidents,'' according to Census Bureau testimony to Congress.
Nobody is certain because counting illegal aliens is a hard thingto do, given the fact that they don't want to be spotted by thegovernment.
Shelby said that is sure to put the matter into the hands of thecourts for a final judgment.
