In Wyoming, the Centers for Disease Control recorded no newcases of TB in 1989, demonstrating that it is a condition that canbe controlled and cured, according to Dr. Lee B. Reichman, directorof the pulmonary division of the University of Medicine andDentistry in New Jersey.
A 35 percent increase in tuberculosis in 1989 in Newark, N.J.,has caught the attention of health officials, who had beenpreviously recording with satisfaction a slow, steady decrease inTB cases over the last few decades.
In parts of Africa, where AIDS is already a health risk,tuberculosis has become epidemic, said Dr. Annik Rouillon,executive director of the International Union Against Tuberculosisand Lung Disease in Paris.
``I have never heard of a rise of the magnitude seen in NewJersey or, on the other hand, the hope generated by no cases in onestate,'' Reichman said.
They attribute the 5 percent national increase in TB cases in1989 to the ravages of the AIDS virus, which destroys the body'simmune system and leaves victims open to TB infection, Dr. PhilipC.
Tuberculosis can be effectively treated, even in AIDS patients,underscoring efforts to screen persons for the disease, the doctorsaid.
Snider said 10 million to 15 million Americans have beeninfected with the tuberculosis germ, but only a small percentage ofthem develop the disease because their immune system was strongenough to prevent the disease from developing.
Snider stressed that tuberculosis, unlike AIDS, is a curabledisease and called for TB screenings at drug rehabilitationprograms, prisons or other places where AIDS tests are beingadministered.
Moreover, unlike AIDS, TB is a highly contagious disease thatcan be spread by airborne particles coughed up by a person withuntreated, clinically active pulmonary TB.
If, however, a person's immune system is impaired by poornutrition or weakened by the HIV virus, people can develop activeTB.
Reichman noted that most American have forgotten about theproblems of TB; from 1981 to 1984, TB cases declined an average of6 percent per year according to the Centers for disease control.
TBvictims include Henry David Thoreau, Washington Irving, FranzKafka, Ring Lardner, Somerset Maugham and Vivien Leigh.
Dixie E. Snider Jr., director of the division of tuberculosiscontrol at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
Hopewell and other health officials discussed the link betweenAIDS and TB during the a four-day World Conference on Lung Healthin Boston, which ends Wednesday.
Untreated, tuberculosiskills about 50 percent of its victims within two years, accordingto the Centers for Disease Control.
For the last three decades,it has been preventable and curable through multiple drug therapy,Snider said.
