Abimael Guzman, founder of the rebel movement, has said of theslums and their people: ``The immense masses of the shantytowns arelike belts of steel that lock in the enemy and hold back hisreactionary forces.''
``Political violence in Peru is not the result of poverty alonebut of humiliation, oppression, hate between classes, racism,'' Sen.
Enrique Bernales, chairman of a committee on violence, said when itreleased a report in September.
``Sendero is seeking semi-legal status as a way of winningmilitants and sympathizers, while at the same time generating aconfusing situation in which the security forces indiscrimatelyrepress members of the legal left along with leftist insurgents,'' aranking police official said privately.
Red-painted slogans hailing the ``People's War'' and ``PresidentGonzalo,'' the rebel name for Guzman, cover the concrete-blockclinic, other buildings with solid walls and even large rocks.
The highway ties Lima to the agricultural lands of the centralAndes and Peru's most important mines, where unions threatened bythe Shining Path have conducted a strike since late October thatcosts millions of dollars a day in export earnings.
Theguerrillas also work with drug traffickers in Peru's eastern jungle,source of the raw material for much of the world's cocaine, and buysophisticated weapons with the profits.
Huaycan is one of the slums where Shining Path works hardestbecause
it is just off the Central Highway, a strategic routethrough the capital's main industrial zone to the mountains.
His movement, a splinter group of the Communist Party, gatheredstrength in Indian communities of the southern Andes for 10 yearsbefore launching its guerrilla war.
Rebel columns strike along the spine of the Andes from theEcuadorean frontier in the north to Bolivia in the south.
Rebels organize support groups in the slums, infiltrate laborunions, organize marches, spread their message of revolution withthe aid of a sympathetic daily newspaper and agitate amonguniversity students.
Guzman, a Marxist philosophy professor, founded Sendero Luminosoin 1970 in Ayacucho, an Andean state capital 230 miles southeast ofLima where he had built a following at the University of Huamanga.
According to counterinsurgency experts, the guerrillas switchedtheir emphasis to the cities because migration of Indian peasants tourban centers accelerated after the highlands became a battlefield.
``Most evaluations of Sendero Luminoso's eight-year expansionunder the democratic system ... have become increasingly grim,'' theAndean Report, a respected economic journal, said recently.
The guerrillas are believed to have only about 5,000 armedcombatants, so they do not appear close to seizing power, but thereis increasing pessimism about the prospects of controlling them.
Introduction:   Shining Path guerrillas, who started theirbloody uprising in the mountains eight years ago, are moving intothe shantytowns that encircle the capital like a noose.
More than 12,000 people have been killed in the civil war, mostof them Andean peasants slain by rebels or security forces, andofficial figures put damage to the shattered economy at $10 billion.
He said conditions were ripe for the next stage in the strugglefor power: inciting a coup against President Alan Garcia byprovoking economic chaos and increasing attacks on the army.
His Maoist rebels, once secretive fanatics, are becoming apolitical force that seeks public support in Huaycan and the othermakeshift communities where two-thirds of Lima's 7 million peoplescrape along.
Followers call Guzman, 54, ``the fourth sword of Marxism'' afterMarx, Lenin and Mao.
Guzman's guerrillas have followed tens of thousands of peasantsfrom the Andes into Lima's shantytowns and see the slums as a newstronghold.
It quoted Guzman as sayingin his first interview since going underground in 1980:   ``We had to follow the road from the countryside to the city.
Shining Path has infiltrated 167 unions and neighborhoodassociations in the Lima slums this year, says a confidentialInterior Ministry report obtained by The Associated Press.
Shining Path's move into a more public role, and through most ofPeru from its Andean base in Ayacucho province, has coincided witheconomic collapse and annual inflation of nearly 2,000 percent.
One reason the movement grows is its appeal to Peru's Indians,subjected for centuries to scorn and discrimination by the whiteruling elite.
The most striking development of the last 18 months has been theShining Path's move into public view in this grimy capital on SouthAmerica's Pacific coast.
