The National Weather Service put out a tornado watch forparts of Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York,all of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and parts of Massachusetts,Vermont and New Hampshire.
``It came in with a huge roar, an enormous amount of water, andit just started shaking and tearing at everything it could get holdof,'' said real estate broker Ike Carroll, who was in his car.
A worker at a building owned by the Madison County Jaycees said42
people were staying there early today, and described the mood ofthe survivors as ``shock, mostly, and disbelief.''
The National Weather Service had issued a tornado watch earlierin the day, but did not issue a more urgent tornado warning until4:39 p.m. CST, when the tornado was spotted at the municipal golfcourse.
Police Chief Richard Ottman initially put the number of dead at19, but his clerk, Kitty Whitworth, later said the death toll waslowered to 17 after police confirmed the count of bodies.
_
Heavy thunderstorms destroyed at least a dozen homes inAlorton, Ill., killing one person and injuring 20 others, fiveseriously, authorities said.
_
In West Virginia, high winds believed to be tornadoes sweptJefferson County early today, overturning trailers, blowing roofsoff homes and downing power lines, authorities said.
In a matter of seconds, cars were hurledthrough the air and crushed, and apartments and stores looked as ifthey had been bombed.
No children in the school were killed, but about 30 youngsterswere in a kindergarten class at the building, and five werereported injured.
Elsewhere:   _
In Georgia, 19 people were injured, four critically, and atleast 200 people were evacuated after a tornado strus.
``They're thankful to be alive and they're thankful theirfamilies are alive,'' he said, adding that the shelter had receivedcalls from around the country from worried relatives.
C., and a tornadotoppled trees, downedpower lines and damaged 20 houses near Greenwood, S.C.
No injurieswere reported in either state.
In Pennsylvania, the weather service said it receivedunconfirmed reports of a tornado that turned over a car and knockeddown trees and power lines near Gettysburg.
``It's like taking six to 10 city blocks and putting them in ablender and putting it on liquefy,'' said rescue worker BobCaraway, whose specialty is cave rescues.
His spokesman, Terry Abbott, said aerialsurveys indicate the twister hopped along a 25-mile path, much ofit straight through Huntsville.
The tornado was Alabama's deadliest since a 1975 twister killed22 people in Birmingham, said Danny Cooper, state emergencymanagement director in Montgomery.
In Huntsville, teams with cranes and floodlights searched forthe injured or dead, hampered by wind-whipped rain and temperaturesthat plummeted overnight from 73 degrees into the 30s.
``Then we heard a large, loud, swirling and humming noise,'' herecalled.
Huntsville Police Maj.
Robert Moder said this morning that 463people were injured by the twister, which plowed through a schooland rural areas as well as a shopping mall and adjacent apartments.
Thomas Farr was driving on Interstate 85 when the tornado hit.``It was picking up cars and tossing them like toys off theinterstate,'' he said.
Introduction:
Rescuers crawled through collapsed homesand shops today looking for more victims of a tornado that carved a3-mile stretch of destruction, killing 17 people, injuring 463 andleaving 1,000 homeless.
Kenneth Lenhard had undergone an operation at the CrestwoodHospital on Wednesday and returned to his room about an hour beforea window in the next room blew out as the tornado passed.
Near Palmetto, Ga.,
resident Jeff Bryant said his home at theSweetbriar Mobile Home Park near Interstate 85 began to vibratewhen the twister approached.
The car infront of us was flipped about 100 yards, and the guy was thrown outof his passenger window and landed 50 feet from his car.
A watch means a tornado is considered possible, while a warningmeans a tornado is believed to exist.
``I thought, `What the heck, I'm already half dead.'''
Along a highway near a destroyed apartment complex, cars wereflipped and smashed into telephone poles and crushed by trees.
The city is home to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and theArmy's Redstone Arsenal, but no serious damage was reported fromthe space agency or weapons testing center.
``It was fast,'' said Lucy Lee Rusk, whose apartment wasbattered by debris.
At least two other tornadoes were reported in Alabama, injuringat least three people in addition to the Huntsville total.
The downtown Jones Valley Elementary School, the WaterfordSquare and adjacent Queensbury apartment complexes were reduced torubble.
The tornado was one of a series that touched down Wednesday inan arc spanning at least seven states from the Deep South to theMidwest.
