Tail Engine Explodes
The plane's tail engine exploded before the crash but it was not immediately clear how the explosion contributed to what a Federal Aviation Administration spokesman called "complete hydraulic failure," an occurrence regarded as extremely rare in the wide-bodied DC-10, which has three independent hydraulic systems that operate all the plane's control surfaces on its wings and tail, and landing gear and brakes.
Hewitt Graham, manager of Graham Flying Service, a charter service and corporate aircraft maintenance firm that operates out of the building closest to the crash site, said he was in his office, answering phones, when five crash victims -- a man, his wife and young son and two other men -- walked in.
In what survivors described as a heroic effort that nearly succeeded, the plane's Seattle-based captain, A. C. Haynes -- a 33-year veteran of the airline who along with the other 10 crew members survived the crash -- struggled for a half-hour to maintain control of the wobbling plane.
Survival Rate Remarkable C. O. Miller, former chief investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board, said the crash's survival rate was remarkable and was probably the result of the pilot's ability to maneuver the plane close to the ground before losing complete control.
At one point, Haynes attempted a landing on Highway 20 near Cushing, Iowa, but chose not to touch down there in favor of trying to make Sioux City, a farming and livestock center of 82,000 in the northwest corner of Iowa along the Missouri River.
The survivors of Wednesday's United Flight 232 from Denver to Philadelphia via Chicago included several dozen passengers who managed to walk out of a dark, smoke-filled, upside-down section of the jet after it broke off and came to rest in a tall cornfield off the runway.
Some aviation experts, speculating on why Flight 232 crashed after completing less than half of its scheduled 930-mile trip to Chicago, suggested that the explosion of the tail engine sent shards of metal through the tail section, somehow destroying common lines that serve the three hydraulic systems.
The impact caused the aircraft to turn over several times as it slid down the runway, "breaking up very badly," catching on fire and then exploding, according to Bob Raynesford, an FAA spokesman.
As rescuers worked underneath floodlights to remove bodies from the crash site, original estimates of the death toll -- one as high as 190, which would have made the crash the second worst in U.S. history -- were reduced.
Suitcases, paper, mail, clothes, chunks of burning metal and bodies were strewn over the inactive runway at Sioux Gateway Airport, where the plane crashed after desperately circling for a half-hour.
Lavonne Quirin of Alta, in Buena Vista County, 75 miles from the airport, said she and her husband found a cone-shaped section of the plane in a cornfield at their seed corn business. '
He said the huge mass of the DC-10 must have helped the pilot slow the plane as it approached the ground and helped keep portions of it intact.
Eyewitnesses said pieces of the 15-year-old airplane -- one of the oldest airliners in United's fleet -- were falling off as far as 75 miles from the site of the crash.
Dr. Romaine Bendixen, clinic commander of Iowa National Guard's 185th tactical fighter group, said he was the first doctor on the scene, about three minutes after the crash.
Introduction:
A crippled United Airlines DC-10 crashed a half-mile short of a runway while trying to make an emergency landing Wednesday afternoon, bursting into a cartwheeling fireball that broke into what one eyewitness described as "15,000 pieces" and killing at least 123 of the 293 passengers and crew members on board.
In one group of six seats, a woman sitting in the middle was barely injured, her husband beside her was dead and two behind her were dead," Bendixen said.
By forcing liquid through a tube, the system provides enough power for a pilot to move an airliner's huge tail rudder and elevators, and wing panels known as flaps and ailerons -- all needed to steer an aircraft.
United, the nation's second largest airline, has one of the oldest fleets in the industry.
"I walked out (through the back of the plane) and found myself in the cornfield," passenger David Landsberger told Cable News Network.
"It's the goddamndest thing I ever saw in my life," said Charles Mertz of Castle Rock, Colo., another of those who walked away.
Push Little Girl Out' "
Then God opened a hole in the basement (the bottom of the plane) and I pushed a little girl out.
United Airlines declined to comment on the number of survivors or to release the names of the 282 passengers and 11 crew members.
I think it landed upside down," said passenger Melanie Cincala of Toledo, Ohio, who said the plane burst into flames after she got off.
On July 10, a United Boeing 747 was forced to make an emergency landing at Miami International Airport after the plane was damaged in heavy turbulence over the Florida-Georgia border.
The airline told NTSB investigators that it had "somehow overlooked" an FAA recommendation to inspect the cargo door latch locks each time the door is closed manually, rather than electrically.
"If an airplane cartwheels, it is very fortuitous that anybody got out," said Miller, now a private aviation safety consultant in Sidona, Ariz.
McDonnell Douglas Corp., which builds the DC-10, said the plane was delivered to United in 1974.
On May 25, 1979, American Airlines Flight 191 lost an engine on takeoff, banked sideways out of control, slammed into a field and exploded.
DC-10 orders collapsed in 1979 because of the recession and the May, 1979, crash.
The National Transportation Safety Board cited "maintenance-induced damage" -- a 10-inch crack in the engine mount -- that caused the left engine to tear loose.
"We were sitting there upside down and it began to fill up with smoke," said Cliff Marshall of Columbus, Ohio, who was returning home from Denver. '
"We don't have a firm count" of the dead, Vohs acknowledged at a press conference seven hours after the crash.
Remarkably, as many as 166 persons survived the violent crash, according to Richard Vohs, a spokesman for Iowa Gov.
Haynes brought the plane into the airport's 9,000-foot-long southwest runway, surrounded by corn, soybeans and pasture with some trees seven miles outside downtown Sioux City.
HYDRAULIC LOSS --
The "complete hydraulic failure" reported by the United pilot is one of the most feared events in flying.
"We thought it was going to make it," said Glen Olson, city editor of the Sioux City Journal.
Size of a Car'
"It's about the size of a car," she said.
The second-worst crash in U.S. history was an Aug. 16, 1987, crash that killed 156 people when a Northwest Airlines jet crashed on takeoff at Detroit Metropolitan Airport.
The cause of that accident, which took place over the Pacific near Hawaii, is under investigation.
Last Dec. 23, a United DC-10 bound for Chicago with 287 passengers had engine problems after takeoff and dumped 52,000 gallons of fuel over the Pacific before returning safely to Los Angeles.
Their clothes were clean, not mussed, their hair was in place and they had no scratches he could see, he said.
On Tuesday, a United DC-10 with 249 people aboard slid 300 yards on the runway after landing at rain-soaked O'Hare International Airport in Chicago but there were no injuries.
The wing hit the ground a half-mile before the runway.
From looking at one or two of them you wouldn't know they were in the accident," Graham said.
He said a smaller plane, such as a DC-9, would have been far more likely to break up more severely.
The hydraulic system that disintegrated Wednesday works the same way a power steering system operates in a car.
Nine persons were hurled to their deaths last Feb. 24 when a cargo door popped open in flight, tearing a gaping hole in a United Boeing 747 jetliner.
Page 17 RESCUE TEAMS READY --
The Sioux City, Iowa, fire-and-rescue operations had practiced for a major emergency.
The search for bodies was difficult because some of them were scattered in the cornfield.
Shortly before touchdown the plane's right wing began to dip and the nose began to fall.
There were reports from passengers and observers that the plane's right-wing engine also failed before the crash.
Also contributing to this story were Larry Green and Tracy Shryer in Chicago, Tamara Jones in Denver and Penelope McMillan and Denise Gellene in Los Angeles.
