Saddam has called Egypt a traitor to the Arab cause for sendingits troops to back the U.S. military buildup in the gulf inresponse to the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Mubarak, wearing a black suit and sunglasses, and BritishForeign Secretary Douglas Hurd, on a two-day official visit, werein the front row of about 1,000 mourners.
The death toll from the attack rose to six today with the deathof the speaker's chauffeur.
Hassan Abu-Basha, a former police minister, told the Caironewspaper Al-Ahram he believed el-Mahgoub's slaying was the work ofIraqi agents.
The assasins wanted to tell their terroristbosses that they pierced the stability of Egypt,'' the newspapersaid.
The state-owned newspaper Al-Ahram, quoting police sources,reported Monday that local Moslem extremists were collaboratingwith Palestinian terrorists sent to the country by Iraq on sabotagemissions.
The government said Iraqi agents or Egyptian Moslemfundamentalists were to blame for the assassination Friday of itssecond-highest official, Rifaat el-Mahgoub.
In Washington, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said: ``Weare shocked by the assassination of the Egyptian speaker.
Behind them were four military jeeps carrying coffins of thefour security men, draped in the red, white and black Egyptianflag.
It said the extremists had provided weapons and explosives tofive Palestinians from Abu Nidal's faction of the PalestineLiberation Organization.
The funeral was at Nasr City, the same suburban neighborhoodwhere Sadat's funeral took place.
Symbolic units from the military services spearheaded theprocession, followed by a military band and two dozenwreath-bearers.
Doctors in a Cairo hospital said thedriver suffered bullet wounds in the stomach, back and arm.
Four assassins riding two motorbikes killed el-Mahgoub in a cardriving by a luxury hotel by the Nile.
Hundreds of red-bereted military police and white-uniformedpolicemen sealed off all streets leading to the mosque where thereligious service was held.
The procession began from the mosque and stopped about 1,500feet away.
He was the firstEgyptian politician assassinated since Islamic extremists shotPresident Anwar Sadat at a military parade nine years ago.
They also lined the funeral processionroute, as did hundreds of plainclothes security men.
