Returning to Canada on Tuesday, Johnson, 26, dodged reportersand the public, refusing to talk about the muscle-building andillegal steroid Stanzolol found in his system after he won the100-meter dash as the world's fastest human.
On the way to New York, however, he stayed in the passengercabin, appearing calm throughout the flight, the Globe said.
Iknow it,'' said his father, Ben Johnson Sr., from Falmouth,Jamaica, in an interview with the Toronto Globe and Mail.
``There's no gold now, just disappointment,'' said Boyd Plaxton,26, of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, one of 200 people on hand whenJohnson's plane landed.
Introduction:
Ben Johnson spent his homecoming in seclusion,without the Olympic gold medal and the hero's welcome, as Canadiansbemoaned the fate of the sprinter who failed the drug test.
``First I was shocked, but after a while, I don't care,''Johnson said when asked what he felt after he was informed he hadfailed the drug test.
Stripped of the gold and banned for life from Canadian teams,Johnson cried in the back of a limousine that whisked him to hismother's home in suburban Toronto after the grueling trip fromSeoul.
In Toronto, a group of restaurant employees chipped in about$350 to charter a plane that circled the city with a bannerproclaiming: ``We believe you, Ben.''
``I never gave him any, and he never told me he took any,''Astaphan said in an interview in a baggage claim area.
``If he had come home with the gold in tact, there would havebeen a million people here,'' Plaxton said.
``Ben loved mom too much to discredit her in any way,'' said hissister, Claire Rodney, of suburban Toronto.
``The last flicker of hope just died,'' said Danny Planetta, whowas watching TV at a bar when he heard Monday night that Johnsonhad tested positive for steroids.
``I got nothing to hide,'' Johnson told The Boston Globe duringthe flight to New York, where he then boarded another plane forCanada.
Johnson, surrounded by a phalanx of security guards, ducked intoa car and made a mad dash for the door when he arrived at thehouse.
He wantsto be with people who love him now, not the hypocrites whoabandoned him,''
Ms. Rodney said outside her mother's house.
But on the flight from South Korea, he denied using the drugseven though Olympic officials said the results were indisputable.
In Canada, a parade in his adopted hometown was canceled, andpromoters backed out of deals or announced their ties with thesprinter would expire quietly.
Police escorted a woman to the door of Johnson's mother's homeso she could deliver a card with more than 1,000 signatures fromCanadians ``who sympathized with your personal devastation.''
``It's not the only thing in life to win a gold medal,'' Johnsonsaid.
Johnson had dedicated his gold to his mother, Gloria, and theCanadian people.
Chaos spoiled a gilt-edged moment for a man who had run 100meters in the fastest time ever, 9.79 seconds.
Johnson spent the 1 hour, 40 minute flight from New York in theplane's cockpit to avoid reporters.
