The tunnels were joined 13{ miles southeast of Folkestone,England, the British terminus near Dover, and 10 miles northwest ofSangatte, near Calais.
TransManche Link, the construction consortium building the``Chunnel'' said the historic linkup occurred at 8:25 p.m.
Tuesdaywhen British workers sent a probe 2 inches in diameter through totheir French colleagues.
The three-hour Paris-to-London trip would be comparable toflying, if transport to and from airports is included, and is halfthe time of the present car-ferry journey.
In London, the conservative Daily Express newspaper noted todaythat Britons will be able to walk to France for the first timesince the Ice Age.
Introduction:   Workmen tunneling under the EnglishChannel have created the first land link between Britain and theContinent, connecting 31 miles of tunnel in a prodigious feat ofengineering and finance.
Since the tunnel construction began in 1987 there have beenseven accidental deaths on the British side and two on the Frenchside.
The tunneling machine on the French side will then guide itselfby laser toward the British machine, ensuring perfect alignment.
The linkup came on the maintenance tunnel, the smallest of threetunnels being dug.
``This is a hugely historic moment because it means, in effect,that Britain is no longer an island,'' a construction unionofficial in Calais said.
Eurotunnel PLC, the Anglo-French consortium overseeing theworld's largest engineering project, plans for high-speed trains topass through the Channel Tunnel in June 1993.
Threading a spinning probe the width of agarden hose through 100 yards of chalk under the Channel bears thefirst tangible fruit in three years of drilling.
The one on the British side will diga side passage, and be buried in cement.
The tunnel's cost has soared from an initial estimate of $9.4billion to $16.7 billion, including an extra $1.97 billion in caseof unforeseen cost overruns.
Whhen its work is done, the drilling machine on the French sidewill be hauled out in pieces.
Eight workers suffered injures, two seriously, about 90 minutesafter Tuesday's linkup when a tractor rolled over on them in aservice gallery, authorities in nearby Sangatte reported.
Linking England and France, the tunnel symbolizes the growingunification of Europe.
It also fulfills a dream of Napoleon, whowanted to send his armies through the tunnel to conquer Britain.
Officials estimate the tunnel trains may carry 28 millionpassengers in the first year of operation.
The tunnel starts a few miles inland on each side, accountingfor its total length of 31 miles.
Mechanical legs slap togetherthe concrete tunnel lining in the wake of the advancing drill head.
Militant workers on the French side are striking for more payand began a work slowdown Thursday, threatening to stall thelink-up.
Eurotunnel doesn'texpect a profit until the end of the century.
