``The matter of police misconduct and brutality has been going onfor at least the 21 years I've been here, but I think the deathspushed the issue beyond the point of tolerance that usually is thecase in matters of police misconduct,'' Glover said.
In a series of rallies in recent weeks, protesters demanded thatofficers involved in the drug raid be suspended, charges againstthose arrested at the hotel be dropped, and that a citizen policereview board be established.
Lloyd Smalley, 71, and Lillian Weiss, 65, were killed Jan. 25 ina fire that started after police hurled a stun grenade into theirapartment, where others also lived, during a drug raid.
``The key point is that any time the head of the policedepartment cannot hire, fire or impose discipline, you are no longerin charge,'' he said.
Since former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, then a35-year-old mayor running for the U.S. Senate, electrified the 1948Democratic National Convention with his historic speech in supportof civil rights, Minneapolis has been viewed as a liberal,progressive city.
The deaths of two blacks at a drug raid that went awry, followed10 days later by a scuffle between police and blacks at a downtownhotel, touched off an outcry by minority leaders for an outsidereview of the department.
The city's police chief, John Laux, says there is no reason toassume the department would be immune to a problem that is presentin all segments of society.
Gleason Glover, president of the Minneapolis Urban League, whichworks for interracial cooperation, said police racism has been aproblem since he took over the league position 21 years ago.
``Ifwe get preoccupied with the image of the city, we're not going to beable to thoroughly address the problems we're facing.''
I think we're approaching thatbreaking point,'' said Van Hayden, 25, a student who says policebeat him at the hotel.
``The liberal image is a false picture,'' said Chris Nisan, aUniversity of Minnesota student who has been involved in recentprotests.
Laux said the 750-member department, which includes 62 minoritymembers and 68 white women, will begin cultural awareness trainingfor all officers, probably this fall.
``Idon't think they (the good officers) are pleased with the few thatare giving them the bad rap _ the spoilers.''
Everyone always says, `Ican't believe this is happening in Minnesota, in Minneapolis, thehome of progressiveness.'
In a letter to police supervisors in mid-February, Laux said:``Let me make one thing perfectly clear _
any act of bias will bedealt with directly and severely.
``There are bad apples in every bunch and the Minneapolis PoliceDepartment is no exception,'' said Councilwoman Sayles Belton.
In the hotel scuffle, police said they responsed to a call of aloud party.
Partygoers alleged that officers used the term``nigger,'' and beat some of those arrested.
No one conducting the raid knew the elderly people were livingthere, said Laux.
``The whole society to different degrees has problems ofracism,'' he said.
