The government banned the use of sheep offal in cattle feed inJune 1988, and later banned the use of cattle brain, spleen,thymus, intestines and spinal cord in food for humans.
Similar embargoes have been imposed by Australia, Finland,Israel, Sweden, West Germany and New Zealand, according to theagriculture ministry, and the European Community has proposed a banon exports of British cattle older than 6 months.
Because of the disease, the U.S. Department of Agriculture'sAnimal and Plant Health Inspection Service banned imports ofcattle, embryos and bull semen from Great Britain in July, saidMargaret Webb, a USDA spokeswoman in Washington.
``I think it is a recognition _
not just of pressure fromfarmers _
but that the public would feel more confident that noBSE-infected animal would ever be likely to go anywhere near thefood chain if there was 100 percent compensation,'' said Sir SimonGourlay, president of the National Farmers Union.
David Maclean, a junior agriculture minister, has complained of``BSE hysteria'' in the media and has insisted that the risk of thedisease passing to humans is ``remote.''
``It is urgent that the same reassurance can be given about thelack of effect of BSE on human health,'' a consultative committeereported to the agriculture ministry.
Earlier this month, the government announced it would payfarmers 100 percent of market value or average market price,whichever is less, for each animal diagnosed with BSE.
According to a report in the British Medical Journal, theincidence of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is no higher in Britain thanit is in countries free of scrapie.
``I think everyone agrees that the risks are low,'' says MartinRaff, a neurobiologist at University College, London.
As of Feb. 9, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Foodsaid that 9,998 cattle have been destroyed after being diagnosedwith BSE.
Introduction:   ``Mad cow disease'' has killed 10,000 cattle,restricted the export market for Britain's cattle industry andraised fears about the safety of eating beef.
The committee's report,released early this year, said it is only a ``shrewd guess'' thatBSE was transmitted through sheep offal in cattle feed.
Ireland's Department of Agriculture and Food said about 20 caseshave been confirmed there, all of them near the border with theBritish province of Northern Ireland.
The government insists the disease poses only a remote risk tohuman health, but scientists still aren't certain what causes thedisease or how it is transmitted.
The suspicion is that the disease was transmitted through cattlefeed, which used to contain sheep by-products as a proteinsupplement.
Mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE,was diagnosed only in 1986.
But the report added: ``If ourassessments of these likelihoods are incorrect, the implicationswould be extremely serious.''
