Once he returns to the sport, and if he returns a winner, all is forgiven," said Paul Gaines, assistant meet director for the Hamilton Spectator Indoor Games, the Canadian meet to be held Jan. 11 that will mark Johnson's return to competition.
"If he's eligible to compete, to me, Ben Johnson is an attraction," said Ray Lumpp, meet director for the indoor meet at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J..
"I'd like to have Ben Johnson regardless of how he runs.
Indeed, in a season that holds the promise of high performance levels in general (as athletes peak for the world indoor championships in Seville, Spain, in March), Johnson's return to competition might help rejuvenate a sport in need of public interest.
Al Franken, promoter of the Sunkist Invitational, is close to signing Johnson for his Jan. 18 meet, saying Johnson will receive the highest appearance fee Franken has ever paid -- $30,000, compared to the $23,000 Franken paid Carl Lewis.
The IAAF voted last September to adopt the controversial "Ben Johnson Rule" allowing the IAAF Council to decertify an athlete's records, titles and results if he or she later is shown to have used a banned substance before those performances.
Others in Johnson's inner circle are Larry Heidebrecht, his agent; Kameel Azan, a Jamaican-born Toronto businessman and former hairdresser who is Johnson's adviser; and Ed Futerman, Johnson's attorney.
Not only did he have to give back the gold medal, but he lost two world records, causing the sport to change its rules in order to take them.
"There is a lot of interest in seeing whether this fellow is a truly great runner or if he is what Carl Lewis said he is, a fair runner who got there by taking drugs," Schmertz said.
The action gave the IAAF power to erase all of Johnson's results between June 12, 1983, and June 12, 1989.
"I want to take back the titles and the records I have been deprived of," the Associated Press quoted Johnson as saying.
Ben sort of transcends the sport, and, God knows, we need someone to transcend the sport."
You hear grumblings among media types and in some circles of the sport, but you have to give the guy the benefit of the doubt. "
"I will never allow it to happen," Primo Nebiolo, president of the International Amateur Atheltic Federation, said Sunday.
Here's a person who has reached the top of everything, lost it all, and now he's coming back to run.
There was the bluster, the bragging, the promise of big things to come.
Said Lumpp of the Meadowlands, "You don't have just a track and field story here, you have a human interest story.
As far as the money, I expect a lot of big stars and I'm going to have a lot of problems giving out (big appearence fees).
However, part of the expectation includes the understanding that the athlete can back up the boasts.
Johnson, speaking at a news conference in Castelfranco Veneto, Italy, expressed little doubt he can regain his form of 1988.
The rule stripped Johnson of his world record of 9.83 in the 100 meters and 6.41 in the indoor 60 meters.
He still is awaiting word from the Canadian Olympic Assn., which placed a lifetime ban on Johnson that prohibited him from representing Canada in the Olympic Games.
"I think honestly, you have to figure that a lot of it is curiosity," Franken said.
It has been two years since Johnson, then world record-holder at 100 meters, was stripped of his gold medal after testing positive for anabolic steroids at the Seoul Olympics.
Some meet directors report concern that longtime sponsors will be reluctant to be associated with a meet that has Johnson as its marquee athlete, given Johnson's former association with anabolic steroids.
Lumpp, who traditionally has one of the largest budgets in North America, said resentment is a problem faced every season by meet directors.
When this happened, it was a bitter disappointment for everyone in the sport to acknowledge that the No.
Howard Schmertz of the Millrose Games in New York has an interest in Johnson, but perhaps not the budget.
The key words in the Johnson camp are Damage Control, or more simply, control.
There has been damage to the sport and people want to blame Ben personally for that damage," Gaines said.
However, it was Futerman who offered to permit a British journalist to interview Johnson -- if he paid $10,000 and submitted his questions in advance.
Johnson reportedly will be paid $10,000 (Canadian) for the meet in Hamilton, a figure that has caused some jealousy among his peers.
BIG MONEY Promoters of indoor meets this season doubt that Johnson will regain his records, but they hope that fans will turn out in huge numbers to watch him try.
Futerman limits Johnson's contact with the media, saying "Ben has said all he has to say.
Johnson gave an in-depth interview to the German magazine, Sport, but only after being paid.
That may go a long way to easing Johnson back into a sport that disowned him almost as swiftly as he burst on the scene.
Franken said he had meetings with his sponsor, Sunkist, to discuss the possible image problem.
Will Kern, meet director for the Times Indoor Games, hesitates at considering it a moral issue.
He has been an outspoken opponent of drug use and has spent the last year speaking to children, warning them against performance-enhancing drugs.
"It's kind of perplexing, isn't it?," Kern said.
"I've had that thought myself, paying him that much money," he said.
With the humility and shame that has been reflected on him, people tend to be more open minded about it.
This scene, which played out two weeks ago in Italy, was familiar, with one exception.
I can't say that it's wrong, especially when deep down
I know Johnson's not the only one who's ever taken drugs.
"
Charlie Francis, who coached Johnson for 12 years, estimated that steroids made Johnson faster by one meter.
Even though Johnson admitted to having taken drugs since 1981, the rule carries a six-year statue of limitations.
What happened to Johnson after his positive test in Seoul is similar to what used to happen to famous East Europeans after defection.
The media were there, as before, chronicling a news conference.
With the accolades cast upon him in the previous years, people were resentful.
It would be ironic if Johnson becomes the star who revitalizes indoor track and field after being blamed for the steady decline of sponsor interest in outdoor track. "
A NEW CAST Johnson, 28, has passed at least four drug tests during his suspension.
You're only as good as your last race, and the fans know that."
"He was the greatest sprinter in history, then he was caught.
"You'll get people who don't care about track, and you may attract back people who have quit coming to track.
And there is a bonus in the contract that rewards Johnson for high attendance figures.
The COA will meet on Friday and is expected to lift the ban.
There is talk of informal athlete boycotts in Canada, where indoor meets often provide car fare and little else to star athletes.
Schmertz, too, has given the matter some thought.
Francis is no longer his coach, having been replaced by Loren Seagrave, former women's coach at Louisiana State University.
The new element was the pervasive skepticism that now attends Johnson's boasts.
"I think that is the attitude the public will display.
Transcendent is the word for the appearence fees Johnson will reportedly earn.
"There are very few secrets among athletes, especially when there's X dollars given to one athlete."
"We are very cognizant of the fact that people are looking upon his return with something like skepticism and animosity.
