In eachcase, the government tries to prevent a mutually advantageoustrade: an employer hiring a low-productivity, hence, low-wageworker who is willing to work at that wage; a renter inducingan increase in the supply of housing by willingly paying ahigher price; and an electorate choosing a desiredrepresentative who is willing to serve.
Of course, since the passage of the 22nd Amendment in1951, there is a two-term limit on the presidency, and 29 ofthe 50 states have some kind of term limit on the governor.
The 22nd
Amendmentreflected Congress's desire to shift the balance of poweraway from the executive, and notably the desire of aRepublican-dominated House and Senate to prevent the rise ofanother powerful Democratic president like FranklinRoosevelt.
Voters do not have to worry that rejecting theirincumbent puts them at a disadvantage relative to othervoters' incumbents, so the electorate can properly weighexperience, fresh ideas, the value of rewarding satisfactoryperformance in office, and so on.
Even if seniority is a net cost in the aggregate, however,each district has an incentive to re-elect its own incumbent(and would if possible vote against the incumbents from otherdistricts) because the representative's relative senioritytranslates into a large share of governmental largess.
The formal system of seniorityis also only a part of the story; members' increasingfamiliarity with interest groups is a kind of seniority thatwould not be eliminated by changes in the rules for committeeassignments, staffing and so on.
The only defense forexecutive term limits is that the electorate needs to beprotected against itself, an argument which, if true, wouldmean that democracy was seriously flawed and would work muchless well than it seems to.
(It is interesting tonote, however, that Hamilton was not discussing term limitson the legislature, and was actually arguing against the termlimits on the chief executive that are contained now in the22nd Amendment.
Theanswer, if one holds constant geographical region and thelevel of per capita income in 1960, is that states with termlimits experienced slightly below average growth ofper-capita income over the last 30 years but were also alittle below average in the fraction of state product thatwent to state and local government expenditures.
But itis unrealistic to think that the enactment of these limitswould lead to great improvements in the functioning ofgovernment and hence, in the performance of the economy.
The seniority system could be changedonly by getting Congress to alter its own rules (as it has attimes in the past) or else by constitutional amendment, whichwould, from a practical standpoint, also have to initiate inCongress.
Presumably the best solution isto let the market decide, that is, to allow the electorate todetermine the proper balance between freshness andexperience.
These argumentsparallel the benefits from worker seniority in firms (or,indeed, the usefulness of a parole system as a carrot to helpcontrol inmates in prisons).
Although the chances of success seem small, one wayto proceed would be to call the proposal the Civil RightsAmendment -- recent experience shows that calling something aCivil Rights Act helps to get it passed.
But if the electoral control process isworking, so that officeholders conform with the interests ofthe majority of their constituents, then the electoraterewards its representatives with re-election.
The real surprise isthat some strong supporters of free markets, such as The WallStreet Journal, have been the biggest advocates of termlimits.
)The only respectable argument in favor of term limits thatI know of refers to the legislature and involves theinteraction with the seniority system.
Perhaps the best test of executive term limits is to checkwhether the states with term limits on the governor haveperformed better or worse than those without such limits.
What is going on here?One argument is that incumbent politicians have unfairadvantages in elections because of their ready access tocampaign funds, staff, mailing and travel privileges, mediapublicity, and so on.
As an example, the votersof Washington state recently rejected a proposal that wouldhave limited the seniority of their congressionalrepresentatives relative to those of other states.
Most of us would not want the government todetermine whether a familiar or a new brand of toothpaste ispreferable; why is a political representative different inthis respect?Many commentators bemoan the high tendency for incumbentsto be re-elected.
If the publicvoted against satisfactory performers just to install a newface, then officeholders would have less incentive to behaveand the system would work badly.
The weakening of the seniority system in Congress would,it must be conceded, sacrifice some genuine benefits.
Thus the main inference froma 95% re-election rate is that the political process isworking and that officeholders are conforming to the wishesof their constituents.
Some aspects of this power, such as greater experience withgovernmental programs, are desirable; others, such as theincreased ability to extract funds from interest groups, arenot.
Thevoters would be better off if they could reach a bindingagreement that precluded the re-election of incumbents, thatis, if term limits were instituted.
