But during the April-June period there were alternating high andlow pressure centers across much of the northern half of the WesternHemisphere:
A high-pressure center north of Hawaii, a low in theGulf of Alaska, a high in central Canada extending down into thenorthern Great Plains states and a low on the East Coast.
They noted that when asked what caused the drought that hit muchof North America in 1988, meteorologists often reply ``the jetstream was displaced northward of its usual position so that storms,which tend to track along the path of the jet stream, were similarlydisplaced northward.''
The authors are Kevin E. Trenberth and Grant W. Branstator of theNational Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., andPhillip A. Arkin of the Climate Analysis Center of the NationalOceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Camp Springs, Md.
In this period, Pacific Ocean temperatures ranged up to 5.4degrees
Fahrenheit below normal in a narrow band extending about4,000 miles along the equator westward from the coast of SouthAmerica, with the coolest spot midway along the band.
The authors took note of computer models predicting increasedfrequency of drought with the buildup of the ``greenhouse effect''global warming caused by accumulation of gases like carbon dioxidein the atmosphere.
If the model holds up, the work will be the first demonstrationof tropical sea surface temperatures affecting weather outside thetropics in the summer, Arkin said.
Introduction:
Some of this year's drought in the Midwest mayhave been caused by ocean temperature abnormalities near the equatorin the Pacific Ocean, according to a new computer study reportedThursday.
Their proposed answer focuses on the development in April, Mayand June of drought in the Midwest, where several states recordedless rain than at any time since 1895.
Such droughts could be anticipated if the temperatureabnormalities turn out to be predictable, one of the authors said inthe report appearing in Friday's issue of Science magazine.
At the same time, a bit to the north of this band, surfacetemperatures ranged up to 0.9 degrees above normal.
