Adrian Dove, assistant regional director for the U.S. Census in charge of outreach, said that despite the Senate's decision, the census bureau "really doesn't know how to go about finding who was legal or illegal."
In 1985, before the federal immigration reform act, the number of illegal aliens in Orange County was estimated at 229,000, ranking it just behind Los Angeles County in California, a county official said.
At stake are the number of seats in Congress for California, Florida, New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania and other states that will be reapportioned on the basis of next year's census.
In recent weeks, representatives from the census office in Santa Ana have visited such social centers as Abrazar and others and told center staff people that they intend to count "everyone, regardless of where they came from," McDonough said.
"Their big thing was, 'We do not care about the origins of where these people are from, but, more importantly, their impact to local economies,' " she said.
Councilman John Acosta said he "was saddened" by the Senate's action because the city was determined "to count every single person, and I know that (now) we're going to to suffer from this monetarily."
Gloria McDonough, director of Abrazar Center, an elderly-assistance center for Latinos in Westminster, said the senators' action shows they have no understanding of the impact of illegal immigration to California communities.
Just before the voice vote, the senators voted, 50 to 41, against killing the proposal to bar aliens from the count.
Introduction:
In a blow to California and other states with large immigrant populations, the Senate voted Friday to bar the Census Bureau from counting illegal aliens in the 1990 population count.
The issue cuts across partisan lines in the Senate, with Minority Leader Bob Dole (R-Kan.) arguing against the White House position on grounds that including illegal aliens in the census is unfair to American citizens.
"For example, we have close to 50,000 people in the city that have qualified through the amnesty process for legal residency," Pulido said.
But he added that he is "optimistic, cautiously optimistic," that House conferees would resist the Senate-approved ban and not force Bush to veto the legislation.
In addition to just counting heads, they're getting economic information of the city that will affect us in the future," he added.
A Senate-House conference committee will decide whether the prohibition against including illegal immigrants in the census totals will be retained or dropped from a $17.4-billion appropriations bill for the State, Justice and Commerce departments.
The Community Development Block Grant formula, among other things, Vestal said, includes use of income figures and percentage of lower income residents in the city. "
"There are enormous additional costs for states who have had a surge of population," Wilson said, adding that those states should receive additional federal aid to cope with the added problems.
Sen. Pete Wilson (R-Calif.) countered that excluding illegal residents from the decennial census is unfair to the states that have suffered from a huge influx of immigration beyond the legal limits.
But Pulido said he believes the House of Representatives will not allow the prohibition to survive, especially since it killed an earlier, similar effort.
For 190 years, said Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-N.Y.), the federal government has counted all inhabitants without regard to citizenship in accordance with the Constitution's provisions.
"But we have a mandate to follow that law, and we would have to find out," he said.
Would Urge Veto
Even if the prohibition survives, Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher has said that he would ask President Bush to veto any bill that comes to his desk with such a provision.
The Senate's action would also have an impact on smaller California cities without substantial Latino populations because census population figures play an important role in Community Development Block Grant formulas, said Don Vestal, Westminster city planner.
said that Georgia and Indiana both lost House seats after the 1980 Census, and that California and New York -- centers of illegal immigration -- each gained seats.
In addition, Pulido and county advocates for poor Latino residents expressed concern that the decision would promote fear and intimidation in the community.
Mario Moreno, head of the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund, said he was shocked by the Senate's decision.
The Senate's action came on a voice vote, despite arguments from the Bush Administration and other opponents that it is both unconstitutional and unworkable.
