Patience was its own virtue in the Long Beach Marathon Sunday, as the men's and women's winners shrewdly waited for others to make mistakes and for the sun -- which was obscured by cloud cover early in the race -- to burn through and take a toll on the runners.
Gural emphatically said it was too hot, "The sun went to work," was how he put it, and he said he experienced tenderness in his liver during the race.
Rex Wilson of New Zealand patiently waited for the lead pack to sort itself out, took the lead at 10 miles and rolled to a victory in 2 hours 12 minutes 27 seconds, a course record.
The refrain from the runners was, "It's not the heat, it's the humidity."
Wilson also made a move, or more precisely, he continued his steady 5:03 mile pace while the rest of the field slowed from the early, faster pace.
Viktor Gural of the Soviet Union, who had been among the leaders for most of the race, said he had trouble with everything.
Wen Yanmin, a 23-year-old student from Bejing, China, picked her way through a strung-out pack and out-kicked Laura Konatz of Toronto to win in 2:43:33, also a course record.
As happened in the men's race, the runners in the lead pack ebbed and eventually faded.
Among the women, the race played itself out in a calm, if not orderly, fashion.
But the mist burned off and the last eight miles -- the toughest portion of the marathon -- became even tougher.
It fell to Konatz, who had been in first and second throughout the race, to hang in there.
Wilson and Yanmin won both the Long Beach Marathon and the Pacific Rim race, for total prize money of $9,500 each.
The tendency is to want to finish the race as soon as possible and get a head start on recovering from it.
Conditions were excellent at the start of the race, which had its largest-ever field of 4,021 entrants.
Guadalupe Roman of Mexico led through much of the race but lost ground steadily in the last five miles and finished sixth.
"I hate the marathon," Wilson, 28, said, sounding quite sensible. "
Run as a race within a race was the Pacific Rim Marathon, which consists of teams from invited countries.
Two Soviet runners -- Irina Ruban and Tatiana Zueva -- who had run side-by-side in third and fourth place throughout the race, faded.
Samson Obwocha, a Kenyan who lives in Gardena, waited for Gural to fade and then made his move.
Yanmin had to come from behind for her victory, giving the women's race an exciting finish.
"I didn't really want to lead all the way," Wilson said.
The weather for the first 1 1/2 hours was cloudy and cool.
The strategy resulted in a personal best time in only his third marathon -- an event he dislikes.
The men's race was led at various times by a pack of about six runners.
