Montana's three largest fires are burning primarily inwilderness areas: the 51,000-acre Canyon Creek fire in theScapegoat Wilderness in northwest Montana; and the 43,000-acreStorm Creek fire and 42,000-acre Hellroaring Creek fire in theAbsaroka-Beartooth Wilderness north of Yellowstone National Park.
Oregon's biggest forest fire, the Tepee Butte fire, has burned36,000 acres of grass and timber on the Wallowa-Whitman NationalForest and the Hell's Canyon National Recreation Area.
To the south in the Bridger-Teton National Forest, strong windspushed the 42,000-acre Huck fire 7,000 acres to the east Tuesday.
A forest products company closed 400,000 acres to the public dueto fire danger and the U.S. Forest Service banned campfires outsidedesignated campgrounds in the Wenatchee National Forest.
Fire crews mobilized in the Star Valley of eastern Idaho afterthe 6,800-acre Trail Creek fire, fanned by shifting winds, brokethrough a control line and raced to within a mile of ranches andgrain fields.
The Canyon Creek fire is burning toward several ranches outsidethe wilderness, while firefighters are trying to prevent the othertwo fires from burning south into the park.
Firefighters wet down buildings at the Canyon cabin and hotelcomplex and moved brush and dead trees out of the path of the109,000-acre North Fork fire.
The state's largest fire was burning on the Indian reservation,where 9,250 acres of timber and brush have burned.
Two new fires flared Wednesday in the Sierra National Forest,one over about 1,800 acres west of Kings Canyon National Park; theother near Mariposa, outside Yosemite National Park.
Utah firefighters controlled a 525-acre fire near northernUtah's Pineview Reservoir and a 100-acre brush fire in ButterfieldCanyon, and expected to control a 60-acre blaze in eastern Utah bytonight.
Oregon's Department of Forestry announced Wednesday that 3.8million acres of private, state and other forest in eastern Oregonwould be closed until further notice due to extreme fire danger andscarce resources to fight new blazes.
Ted Schwinden appealed to the public Wednesday to avoidoutdoor recreation over the Labor Day weekend to limit the firerisk.
The 7,900-acre Eagle Bar fire near Hells Canyon at the Oregonline burned out of control for the 12th day.
Introduction:
Here is a brief look at forest fire developments in the Westernstates:   About 2.1 million acres are smoldering from 30 fires, thefederal Bureau of Land Management said.
Sue Mitchell, a BLM spokeswoman, said there were no active, orflaming, fires and all but a few firefighters have been recalledfrom the blazes.
The largest blaze, the Clover-Mist, grew by nearly40,000 acres to 231,000 acres.
