However, the arrival in Florida of the military and the assignment ofspecial responsibilities to Mr Andrew Card, the young and telegenictransportation secretary, is making a difference.
In the process, Mr Bush has been able to call on the power of incumbency,the one asset denied his presidential rival, Mr Bill Clinton, who is tovisit Florida today.
His poignant and brief address to the nation on Tuesday night, committingthe government to pay the emergency relief costs and calling on Americans tocontribute to the American Red Cross, also struck the right sort of note.
After a faltering and heavily criticised initial response to the disaster,both the president and his administration seem finally to be gettingassistance to those rendered homeless and to businesses and farms that havebeen destroyed.
As if to underline the political benefit to the president, a Harris pollconducted from August 26 to September 1 yesterday showed Mr Bush with 45 percent support - behind Mr Clinton by just five points - reflecting a closerrace than other recent surveys.
Yesterday, Mr Bush flew to South Dakota to tell farmers of an expansion ofthe subsidised grains exports programme and then to the General Dynamicsfactory in Texas to announce an F-16 fighter sale to Taiwan.
With Mr Bush constantly in the headlines, Mr Clinton has been left on thesidelines, able to do little more than offer sympathy and sotto vocecriticism of the president's initial stumbling.
FEMA has, underthe Republicans, become the ultimate patronage backwater, with, according toone congressional study, ten times as many political appointees as thetypical arm of government.
Introduction:THERE are growing signs that Hurricane Andrew, unwelcome as it was for thedevastated inhabitants of Florida and Louisiana, may in the end do no harmto the re-election campaign of President George Bush.
Contrary to its brief, but confirming a prescient recent report bya House committee that Mr Stickney was 'uninterested in substantiveprogrammes', FEMA was caught completely unprepared by Andrew, resulting inunseemly disputes between state and federal authorities over who did what inbringing relief.
Its current head, Mr Wallace Stickney, is a New Hampshire politicalassociate of Mr John Sununu, the former state governor and White House chiefof staff.
