In 1988 the nation recorded 32 tornado deaths, down from the 59killed a year earlier and well below the long-term average of 99fatalities annually, the National Weather Service reported on Sunday.
``There is no way of knowing what this tornado season will bring,but the way to survive is through preparedness,'' said Ed Ferguson,deputy director of the National Severe Storms Forecast Center inKansas City.
Meteorologists have attributed the decline in tornado deaths inrecent years to increased public awareness of the storms, which aremost common in May and June but can occur in any month of the year.
Other months averaging more than atwister-a-day somewhere in the nation are July, 82; August, 57;March, 50 and September, 38.
States with a single fatality apiece were Kentucky,Michigan, Missouri, New York, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas.
After a low point in the winter they begin to increase sharply inMarch and peak in May with a national average of 166 twisters inthat month, according to records kept at the National Climatic DataCenter.
Introduction:   One of nature's most vicious spectacles, thetornado, is poised to renew its annual assault on America, aschangeable spring weather breeds the storms that spawn twisters.
Hot weather stirring the air helps form thunderstorms and theirtornadoes, with 60 percent of all twisters occurring between noonand sunset, according to the National Center for AtmosphericResearch.
Last year was one of fewer than normal tornado deaths, but evenso, more than 700 of the violent funnel clouds struck the nation.
The transition from winter to spring, spurring unsettled weatherand frequent thunderstorms, helps create tornadoes, violentlytwisting winds that reach down from thunderclouds.
The typical tornado is only about 50 yards wide and travels abouttwo miles on the ground _ 87 percent of the time heading toward thenortheast, NCAR researchers report.
When twisters are in an area, common sense and knowing a fewsimple rules can save lives, the National Weather Service says.
If tornadoes threaten, turn on radio or television to keepcurrent on the danger, the agency says.
The average for November is only 23 tornadoes, and therecord had been 81, set in 1973.
Be wary of areas with poordrainage, however, because of the possibility of flooding from thethunderstorm.
But while an individual twister can cover only a small area, theyoften come in groups and in the affected area destruction can betotal.
If atwister is reported, safety rules include:   _
At home, seek shelter immediately in a basement or interiorhallway.
_
At work or in public buildings, head for interior hallways onthe lowest floor, or designated shelter areas.
That took place on Mother's Day when 57 twisters tore through partsof Arkansas, Illinois, Iowa and Wisconsin.
June ranks second, averaging 150 tornadoes, followed by Aprilwith 109 in a typical year.
