"While the views of President Bush's first Supreme Courtnominee, David Souter, were virtually unknown before hisconfirmation, the 43-year-old Mr. Thomas has boldlyarticulated his vision of constitutional law, both as a judge-- he now sits on the Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia Circuit, the nation's second-highest bench -- and,before that, as chairman of the Equal Employment OpportunityCommission for eight years.
Writing in the Howard Law Journal in 1987, Mr. Thomasargued for what he called a "natural law" or "higher law"mode of judging, in which the judge examines not only thetext of the Constitution or statute but also the moralprinciples underlying the American form of government.
Damn welfare, that relief]"
At home the Thomas boys workedsix hours a day in addition to school: raising the chickens,pigs and cows; cleaning the house and the yard; painting,roofing, plumbing and fixing; maintaining the oil trucks andmaking deliveries.
"At a conference of black conservatives in San Francisco,Calif.,
Mr. Thomas's eloquent departures from the civilrights orthodoxy on quotas and government handouts greatlyimpressed the newly installed Reagan administration, and in1981 he was nominated to be assistant secretary for civilrights in the Department of Education.
Mr.
Thomas had his skirmishes with the LeadershipConference on Civil Rights, an umbrella group instrumental indefeating the Bork nomination, and he made a dangerous enemyin the American Association of Retired Persons, which accusedhim of letting legal protections for the elderly lapse.
"If I or a member of my family were in trouble, he is thekind of person I'd like to appear before," Judge Damon Keith,a Carter appointee on the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals inDetroit said in an interview.
While at the EEOC, Mr. Thomas gavespeeches accusing the Republican Party of "blatantindifference" toward black voters, and chastised RonaldReagan in particular for letting Bob Jones University getaway with racial discrimination, and for "foot dragging" onthe Voting Rights Act extension.
Mr.
Thomas maintains, with support from Abraham Lincoln andabolitionist Frederick Douglass, that the Constitution mustbe read in the context of the principle of equality inherentin the Declaration of Independence.
Born in a smallframe house on the outskirts of Savannah, Ga., in 1948, Mr.
Thomas endured all the hardships of the segregated South.
"Many of Mr. Thomas's critics have taken his unconcealedadmiration for Ronald Reagan, his former boss, and RobertBork, his predecessor on the D.C.
"Nevertheless, "I never gave up my grandfather's ideals,and when my left-wing opinions began to clash with thoseideals, I began to move away from the left."
And these arepeople looking to me, to the judge, to figure out what'sjust, to correctly apply the law.
The next year he was promoted to the top job of the EEOC.Under the Carter administration, the agency had zealouslypromoted numerical goals and timetables. "
"Basically the job of a judge is to figure out what thelaw says, not what he wants it to say," Mr. Thomas told me.
In a series of interviews with me afew weeks prior to his nomination, Mr. Thomas echoed themesthat run through his articles and speeches over the pastdecade.-- "I don't believe in quotas.
Thomas came in, andhe rejected all that," remarks William Robinson, dean of theDistrict of Columbia School of Law.
It is here, under thestern tutelage of his grandfather, Myers Anderson, that Mr.
Thomas locates the beginning of his true education. "
The civilrights movement was at its greatest when it proclaimed thehighest principles on which this country was founded --principles such as the Declaration of Independence which werebetrayed in the case of blacks and other minorities."
"Dean Robinson added, "People often confuse what Clarencethinks with what some of his friends on the right think, butClarence is his own man."
In the summer of 1955, Clarence Thomas and his brotherwent to live with their maternal grandparents, who owned anice delivery and fuel oil business.
In 1987 he told the Atlantic, "When thecivil rights people indict me, the man they are indicting isthat man.
"The problemfor my opponents, and for my friends, is that I don't think Ifit any of these molds very well.
I believe inthe American proposition, the American dream, because I'veseen it in my own life."Mr.
Part of King's legacy, for Mr. Thomas,is his reflection on the close connection between law andmorality.
Someweeks before word of the nomination came,
Mr. Thomasconfessed to being slightly bemused by all the attentionbeing paid to him by scholars and courtwatchers.
When youget up there, you just hope that you don't get destroyed sothat even if you don't make it, you can go on with yourlife."Mr.
Circuit with Mr.
Thomas and is his closest friend on the bench) thinks, isthat "Clarence has an amazing ability to neutralizeopposition.
The more I learn about the ideals ofthose men, the more enthusiastic I get.
When reminded of ThurgoodMarshall's comment that he could not wholeheartedly celebratethe bicentennial of the American founding because theConstitution permitted slavery, Mr. Thomas shook his head. "
As asociety, we should develop better policies to deal with theunderclass than the failed solutions of the past.
Hisfather left before he could walk, and his mother worked as ahousemaid and picked crabs from the marsh to eat and sell.
King often quoted Thomas Aquinas's statement,"An unjust law is a human law that is not rooted in eternallaw and natural law."
"At the same time, "impartiality is not the same thing asindifference.
"Our judicial philosophy maynot be the same, but he is a bright and reflective man whobelieves passionately in fairness.
Hewent on to Yale Law School, where he worked summers at NewHaven Legal Assistance, continuing what he calls "mypolitical consciousness raising.
Introduction:
What kind of justice would Clarence Thomas, PresidentBush's nominee to fill the Supreme Court seat vacated byThurgood Marshall, be?
As a people, we need to find solutions to problemsthrough independence, perseverance and integrity.
"As
Mr. Thomas remembers, his grandfather believed that"Man
ain't got no business on relief as long as he can work.
I say this withoutreservation, and in full knowledge of all the people whocomplain about him.
Mr.
Thomas and his wife Virginia live in Northern Virginiawith Jamal, Mr. Thomas's son from a previous marriage.
"There is a difference between the role of a judge and thatof a policy maker.
