The crash early Wednesday of the huge C-5A transport was thefirst major accident in the nearly 3-week-old, round-the-clockdeployment of U.S. personnel and equipment to the gulf.
Four of the 17 people aboard the cargo plane were injured whenthe massive aircraft tumbled into a field early Wednesday aftertaking off from Ramstein Air Base, a stopover for many U.S.military flights bound for the gulf region.
military buildup in the Persian Gulf were among the 13 peoplekilled in the crash of U.S. military cargo plane in West Germany,military authorities said Wednesday.
The plane was bound for Frankfurt carrying medical supplies,food and aircraft maintenance equipment for U.S. troops sent toSaudi Arabia following the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, U.S.Air Force officials said.
The plane was from the 60th Military Airlift Squadron fromTravis Air Force Base in California and was en route to Rhein-MeinAir Base near Frankfurt, authorities said.
Late Wednesday, the Air Force released the names of the victims.
The accident occurred about six miles from Miesau, where U.S.military authorities have been removing a cache of chemical weaponsunder an agreement with the West German government.
Ramstein, the largest U.S. Air Force base in Europe, is 90 mileswest of Frankfurt.
Listed as dead from the 433rd were Maj.
John M. Gordon, pilot;Maj.
Richard W. Chase, pilot; Sgt.
The C-5 is the largest transport plane in the Air Force fleetand costs about $148 million.
The 433rd had not been called to active duty, but somereservists with the wing were voluntarily participating inOperation Desert Shield after arranging time off from theircivilian jobs.
Nine of those killed and one of those injured were reservistswith the 433rd Military Airlift Wing from Kelly Air Force Base inSan Antonio.
He said the aircraft was just over 20 years old, which he saidis not uncommon for the C-5.
``We don't haveany indication as to what the cause of the accident was.''
The West German Defense Ministry said in a statement Wednesdaythe crash posed no danger to the operation.
It left the Ramstein air base at about 12:30 a.m. and clippedthe tops of trees before crashing and breaking apart.
The four were hospitalized and reported in satisfactorycondition, said Sgt.
CynthiaBorecky of England Air Base, Louisiana, and Sgt.
``I don't want to speculate on the cause of this mishap,'' saidBrig.
Twisted chunks of wings, landing gear, fuselage and other debriswere scattered over a wide area.
On April 4, 1975, aC-5B carrying Vietnamese orphans crashed shortly after takeoff nearSaigon, killing 172 people.
