In the end, drought relief became a one-time bonus for thousandsof farmers in parts of the country that in 1988 generally enjoyedgood crops at higher prices and wouldn't have qualified as disasterareas, including parts of California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas,Oklahoma, Maryland and New Jersey.
Pryslak Farms of Great Meadows, N.J., a $9 million-a-yearproduce, garden and truck farming operation, collected $100,000 forlosses on endive, escarole and leaf lettuce because the localAgriculture Department official said he thought the $2 millionceiling applied to just the vegetable operation.
By the time checks were being written at the county level, theAP found, fellow farmers elected to locally administer federalagriculture programs were approving claims for such common perilsas insects, sand, wind, cold and fungus, even ``ineffectiveherbicide.''
``We lucked out last year on account of the boys up north,''said Travis Turnipseed, a Levelland, Texas, cotton farmer who's hadhail damage 23 out of the last 28 years, but collected cash for thefirst time in 1988.
Disaster payments in several states also went to banks,corporations, investment firms, churches and even local governmentssuch as the city of Littlefield, Texas, despite regulationsdesigned to match benefits to small farmers.
``It was there, so I took it,'' said Melvin Przilas, a wheat andcorn farmer in the Texas Panhandle who collected $2,254 becausehail and Russian wheat aphids
damaged his 1,265-acre irrigatedfarm, which grosses $300,000 to $400,000 a year.
In North Dakota, the hardest-hit state, farmers lost anestimated $1.1 billion to the drought, but direct federal aid cutthat by 36 percent, to $706 million.
The record $3.9 billion drought relief program of 1988, hailedas salvation for small farmers devastated by a brutal dry spell,became
much more _ an unexpected, election-year windfall forthousands of farmers who collected millions of dollars for nature'snormal quirks.
``Being an election year, there were a lot of concessions tofarmers,'' said Dan Otto, a professor at Iowa State University.``(The politicians) were trying to get recognized as a friend ofagriculture.''
The politics of 1988 and the media attention the droughtreceived _ a steady bombardment of print and electronic images ofshriveled cornstalks and cracked, dusty fields _ played key rolesin rushing through the nation's largest ever disaster reliefmeasure.
``Some farmers just got grandfathered in,
that's true,'' saidDan Shaw, deputy administrator of the Agricultural Stabilizationand Conservation Service, which administers payment programs forthe Agriculture Department.
Farm Entitlement reports, the ASCS summaries of individualfarms' participation in the program, were requested for about12,000 farms in those counties under the Freedom of Information Act.
Because much of the ASCS paperwork never leaves the counties,reporters then traveled to 22 county offices in eight states toexamine more detailed drought program files for 346 specificfarmers, also available under the FOIA.
Loose regulations and lax enforcement of them were the majorreasons for the government generosity, the AP found by examiningfederal records in 14 states through the Freedom of Information Act.
In Iowa the aid, calculated bythe federal government at $335 million, went a long way, stateagriculture secretary Dale Cochran said.
Because of hail damage, Gresham and his companies collected$248,662 from the drought program, plus $159,478 from federal cropinsurance.
By the end of this October, about one-quarter of all U.S.farmers had collected on damage to most of 506 eligible crops andjust about any kind of weather peril in 49 states.
To examine the program, the AP interviewed agriculture expertsin 21 states then chose 14 states whose rainfall data and droughtpayments were matched county by county in a computer database.
In several cases, corporations ineligible for drought reliefbecause of the bill's $2 million cutoff on gross annual incomecollected anyway because they owned a stake in a farm.
TheAmerican Cancer Society got a check, as did a unit of Texas A&amp;MUniversity and the mid-Atlantic headquarters in Baltimore of theJesuit order.
Despite all the apparent misapplications of aid, the program didprovide crucial assistance to farmers wracked by severe drought.
Santa Fe Pacific Co., the railroad giant with annual revenue of$3 billion, received a check through its energy division.
Gresham readily offers that he and his sonoperate their farms under five different names precisely because offederal payment limitations
_ in the case of drought aid, $100,000per farmer.
Those growers profited by ``triple-dipping'': reaping cropinsurance as well as drought aid on damaged crops, then replantingthe same ground for a successful harvest _ all perfectly legalunder the 1988 program.
An Associated Press study conducted over seven months found thedrought relief bill paid cash to farmers for everything fromhail-damaged kiwi fruit in California to heat-stressed radicchio inMassachusetts, rain-bloated tomatoes in New Jersey and washed-outbird seed in Colorado.
Payments went far beyond the initial intent to save Midwesterngrain growers from bankruptcy, an effort
_ supported by almosteveryone _ that simply grew and grew and grew.
``I'll be the first to tell you it worked out to a good year forme,'' Gresham said.
TheAssociated Press went back to track where the $3.9 billion went andfound the money spread far beyond the drought.
Nothing in federal procedures,however, requires paperwork to be forwarded to higher officials forroutine approval or checking.
Although some producers appeared to have violated eligibilityrequirements _ exceeding the allowed gross annual income, forexample _
their requests for aid were approved anyway by localofficials.
Without that money, ``it would have meant substantially morelosses to Main Street,'' Cochran said.
