In addition to the reductions in corn and soybean yields, Wilsonsaid production of some other spring-planted crops has suffered,including: oats, 206 million bushels, down 45 percent; barley, 288million bushels, also down 45 percent; and sorghum, 561 millionbushels, down 24 percent.
Assistant Secretary Ewen M. Wilson, the department's chiefeconomist, said the drought may add 1 percent to the cost of foodthis year, 2 percent next year.
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate AgricultureCommittee, said in a statement, ``Today's crop report confirms ourfears about the impacts of this summer's tragic drought.
Corn is the largest and most important crop grown by Americanfarmers and, as a feed ingredient, is essential to the productionof meat, poultry and dairy products.
Overall, the department's Agricultural Statistics Board puttotal U.S. crop production at 88 percent of the 1977 average, ascale used to compare output from year to year.
Durum was estimated at 54.6 million bushels, down 41 percentfrom last year's harvest, and other spring wheat was shown at 212million bushels, down 53 percent from 1987.
The new surveys led USDA experts to predict the 1988 corn cropwill total 4.48 billion bushels, down 37 percent from last year'sharvest and the smallest output since 1983.
In May and June, before drought had made its biggestimpact, USDA projected the corn harvest _ based on trends and anassumption of normal weather _ at 7.3 billion bushels.
Cotton, which thrived last month in the hot,humid weather, is expected to increase from last year.
The corn crop is expected to average 78.5 bushels per harvestedacre, down from 119.4 bushel per acre last year, a recordyear-to-year decline of 34 percent.
The Julyprojection was 1.84 billion bushels
The wheat total included winter wheat planted last fall, whichbarely stayed ahead of the drought.
``The drought, as you can see, is still basically with usthroughout the entire United States,'' Strommen said.
``That's on top of an additional estimated increase in foodprices somewhere in the region of 4 percent,'' Wilson said.
But durum and the other springvarieties, which are produced in the hard-hit northern plains,showed sharp declines.
Introduction:
An annual Agriculture Department surveyconfirmed Thursday that a deadening drought will curtail the fallcorn harvest by a third or more, resulting in higher retail foodprices for months and years to come.
That matched thelow 1983 reading, when sharp cutbacks in government acreageprograms, along with drought, reduced crop production sharply.
Before the heat and dry weather, USDA hadexpected a 1988 food price hike of 2 percent to 4 percent.
The total grain supply for 1988-89 _ whichincludes inventories on hand at the beginning of the season _ isdown 24 percent from last season.
``But becauseof large pre-season stocks, total supplies are enough in most casesto assure and adequate food supply at home, satisfy foreigncustomers and meet our food-aid commitments.''
The soybean harvest was estimated at 1.47 billion bushels, down23 percent from 1.9 billion bushels produced last year.
He scoffed at any suggestion, however, that the United Statesmay have lost its capacity to produce sizeable crop surpluses.
But those projections were revised downward a month ago to 5.2billion bushels, assuming farmers got normal weather the remainderof the season.
``Today's reports confirm that the drought has had a majorimpact on this year's crops,'' Wilson told reporters.
Meanwhile, USDA weatherman Norton Strommen said rain in themidcontinent in recent days has not meant an end to the drought.
The report came hours after President Reagan signed a $3.9billion relief bill that he acknowledged won't bring rain to cropsalready sweltering, but hopefully will help farmers survive toplant again next spring.
