Kiyoo Mogi, chairman of the six-member panel that will make the call on theTokai earthquake and former head of the University of Tokyo's EarthquakeResearch Institute, says several factors make the Tokai region more suitedthan others for what he calls 'a national experiment'.The region's geology is straightforward, so they can narrow down the likelylocation of the anticipated earthquake.
Instead, the six experts are watching for the rapid upliftof the crust on the westward side of the trough that preceded quakes alongadjacent sections of the fault in 1944 and 1946.
If the entire section rupturesagain, the resulting quake could reach eight on the Richter scale,endangering the lives of 10m residents in the area.
The data are telemetered to Tokyo where they are monitored around the clockin the hope that six experts, to be summoned at a moment's notice, willrecognise unusual phenomena that may indicate an imminent earthquake.
Long after the rest of the world has abandoned hope of predictingearthquakes, Japan continues to spend Dollars 2.5m (Pounds 1.6m) a yearmonitoring the Tokai region and close to Dollars 100m more on generalearthquake prediction research.
Unfortunately, it hasproved impossible to conclude consistently and definitively whether thesignspredictors look for - swarms of small earthquakes, unusual bulges andcreeps in the earth's crust, sudden changes in geomagnetism or electricalresistivity - are precursors or simply background geologic noise.
Mogi would like to add a thirdcategory between the two that would indicate 'some level of concern'.Many scientists agree a 'maybe' is not unreasonable, given the state of theart.
Hesays if they knew what precursory phenomena occurred the last time thatsection of the fault slipped, in 1854, they would be able to predict thenext earthquake.
For prediction believers, it is a smallprice to pay, as Japan is one of the world's most earthquake-pronecountries.
The Suruga Trough, a deep submarine trench running just offshore, forms theboundary between two of the earth's tectonic plates.
Recent studies by seismologists at the Ministryof Construction have indicated the possibility of a significant quakeoccurring in the Izu area between Tokai and Tokyo.
But, in effect, the budget is divided among researchersand institutions in the same proportions each year.
Meanwhile, the controversy might be settledif the experts get their call from the technicians monitoring the Tokaidata.
High public expectations are coming back to haunt the six-member panel ofexperts, which must conclude that the gathered data indicate either 'a causefor concern' or 'no cause for concern'.
Aside from the Tokai effort, scientists outside the programme are disturbedthat it is so generously funded and has so little to show.
Japan's prediction research activities, primarily overseen by theMinistry of Education, Science and Culture, are subject to no such review.
The evidence is that significant strain has accumulatedalong the fault since the region's last big earthquake.
The public, and even public officials, remain largely unaware that Japan'sscientists are debating whether prediction is impossible or merelydifficult.
Trains will be stopped, traffic routed out of the area, stores closed andpupils let out of schools.
But for increasingly vocal sceptics in Japan, it is at best a misguidedeffort that wastes money and is dangerously misleading the public.
Japan has had numerous killerquakes outside the Tokai monitoring network, including a 7.8 earthquake offthe coast of Hokkaido last year that claimed more than 200 lives.
Public officials, however, are insisting the experts make an 'it'scoming' or 'it's not' decision.
Despitethe protests, however, Japan's earthquake prediction programme rolls alongon inertia, insularity and unrealistic public expectations.
Most citizens do not realise that Tokai is the only region inwhich the government even intends to attempt a short-term warning.
More than 150 metersand gauges track seismic activity, rock strain, crustal tilt, tidalmovements and ground water levels.
