All the important players -- the president, the governors and congressional leaders -- agree that the goal of such reform is to transform the welfare system into one that enables poor families to achieve, in the president's words, "real and lasting emancipation" from welfare dependency.
Nonetheless there is merit in the governors' plan, as there is in the administration's reform proposals, and in the reform bills under consideration in the Senate.
An extra $2 billion a year added to the present anti-poverty programs (which, as we have mentioned before, if simply handed out in cash would be enough to lift every poor household in America above poverty) is unlikely to accomplish all that the governors promise.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, even backed off earlier criticism of the administration's welfare plan, saying after the White House meeting, "I feel better about the prospects of welfare reform than I did yesterday.
"
By endorsing a federal welfare standard, the administration would undercut its own proposal to give the states wider latitude to set their own welfare criteria and standards, tailored to their populations.
The most unattractive feature of the governors' welfare plan is its price tag -- up to $2 billion a year on top of the $100 billion-plus already devoted to assorted anti-poverty programs.
Since all of the principals agree on the ultimate goal of welfare reform, it seems reasonable to expect that they can achieve a plan of action.
Meeting this week in Washington, the governors said they want to transform the current welfare system -- largely an income-maintenance system -- into more of a job-support system.
Most important, the governors would require that welfare recipients do something productive in exchange for their benefits, be it completing school, receiving vocational training or holding a job.
The leaders of the National Governors Association came away from a White House meeting this past Tuesday pleasantly surprised that they were able to reach an accord with the president on many points.
The governors argue that by spending the extra $2 billion a year, the federal government would be making an investment.
However committed the administration and Congress may be to reform, they're unlikely to endorse a plan that increases the deficit.
By setting aside more money for job training, day care and other support, they say, taxpayers would ultimately realize savings as welfare recipients are weaned from the public rolls.
These successes have encouraged the governors of New York, New Jersey, Washington and Missouri to undertake their own reform programs.
After all, Americans have spent more than $1 trillion over the past two decades to alleviate poverty and curb dependency without seeing evidence of an appreciable return on their substantial investment.
The results in Massachusetts, California, Illinois, Pennsylvania and Utah have been promising.
