"Unbelievable," scoffs Mr. Skoberne as he reads a lettertelefaxed from the council of Banja Luka, a town with a largeSerbian population in the province of Bosnia-Hercegovina,decreeing that all Slovene-owned assets in the city are to beinventoried and frozen.
"It's not size that makes a country successful," saysJosip Skoberne, head of the international division of theSlovene Chamber of Economy, citing EC-member Luxembourg, farsmaller in population and area than Slovenia.
"This shunning by Western Europe, and the U.S., isparticularly disillusioning for a people who enjoy theirBMWs, Peugeots and Fiats, their shopping trips to Munich andVenice and their vacation chalets in the Alps.
Introduction:LJUBLJANA, Yugoslavia --
As federal army tanks and jetspounded the breakaway republic of Slovenia last week, thepin-striped brokers of the Ljubljana Stock Exchange defiedair-raid dangers and gathered in their sixth-floor tradingroom.
While the European Community is counting on the peace planit brokered to defuse tensions (it calls for a three-monthperiod of negotiations in Yugoslavia), most governmentsconcede that the country's breakup is inevitable.
For the moment, the Slovenes are feeling lonely,unrecognized by the nations of the world.
Joze Mencinger, an economist and former finance ministerof Slovenia, illustrates the republic's economic resilienceby noting that while Yugoslavia's industrial output fell 18%so far this year, Slovenia's declined only 10%.
Slovenia's exportsof assembled cars, pharmaceuticals, refrigerators andfurniture account for a third of the total value of the goodsand services it produces.
Almost every country on thecontinent has its own disenchanted minorities, from theSoviet Baltics to French Corsica, that could be encouraged bythe independence declarations of Slovenia and the neighboringrepublic of Croatia.
"Finding new markets in the West is all the more urgentwith the certain decline in Slovenia's trade with the rest ofYugoslavia.
At the stock exchange, Mr. Veselinovic frets that hispost-independence plans to trade in gold, commodities andforeign currencies are jeopardized by the uncertaintyengulfing Slovenia.
"Okay, we must realize that we will be the less-developedpart of Europe," he says.
"There is a certain logic to this," says DraskoVeselinovic, the exchange's chief executive.
The Slovenes,from their days in the Austro-Hungarian empire, have alwaysconsidered themselves to be Westerners.
Their considerabletrade with the rest of Yugoslavia, which helped make them thecountry's richest people, is vanishing.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has heldup recent events here -- the Yugoslav army assault onSlovenia and the bitter ethnic clashes between Croats andSerbs -- as a warning to his land of what can happen whennationalism fractures a country.
"We've decided to be our own country," says Mr.
Veselinovic, "but we really don't know how we will executeit.
"The two million people of this picturesque Alpine republicare waking up from their two-week nightmare sobered by theimplications of their intoxicating declaration of secessionfrom Yugoslavia on June 25.
When remindedby a visitor that Austria, in contrast, is posting robustgrowth, he grows
somber.
One of the major motivations behind Slovenia'sindependence grab was to free itself from the "Yugoslav risk"that hampered most attempts to attract foreign investment.
Nationalismovershadows pragmatism, a quality that once distinguishedSlovenia from the rest of the often bewildering Balkans.
Nestled between the Alps and the Adriatic, Slovenia becamethe most prosperous patch of communist Europe.
