In addition to the deaths, some 13,000 people were injured andmore than a half-million were left homeless in the Armenianearthquake, which had a magnitude of 6.8 on the Richter scale.
Introduction:
The earthquake that killed 25,000 people inArmenia pushed last year's earthquake-related death toll worldwideto the highest level since 1976, when a Chinese earthquake killed atleast 10 times as many, the U.S. Geological Survey reports.
Many of the deaths in Armenia were blamed on collapsingbuildings, as the earthquake rattled concrete structures until theyfell to the ground, according to subsequent analyses.
On Nov. 6 an earthquake measuring 7.3 on the scale claimed 730lives and injured about 4,000 people on the border between Burma andChina, the Geological Survey reported.
An earthquake centered in eastern Canada on Nov. 25 was feltwidely across that country and in the northeastern United States asfar south as Washington, the Survey reported.
The main shock was followed within minutes by a second, measuring5.8 on the Richter scale, which estimates the energy released by anearthquake.
Three significant earthquakes were recorded in the United Stateslast year, including the strongest shock of the year.
The estimated earthquake death toll in 1988 includes anadditional 2,000 or more people who died in other earthquakes aroundthe world, the Survey reported Monday.
The only U.S. earthquake death last year occured when someonesuffered a heart attack after an earthquake measuring 4.8 inWhittier, Calif., in February.
And Japan, usually very seismically active, recorded only onesignificant earthquake last year, the Survey reported.
Thatearthquake, measured at 7.6, occurred March 6 in the Gulf of Alaskaand resulted in only minor damage.
In Africa, eight people working in a gold mine in South Africadied Jan. 5 in an earthquake rated at 5.2.
Another recent earthquake in the Soviet Union, claiming about1,000 lives, struck in Soviet central Asia.
That one occurred inJanuary, however, and so does not count in the 1988 toll.
An earthquake of 5.0 can cause considerable damage, andthe strength rises by 10 times for each whole number on the scale.
Earthquakes in the eastern part of North America tend to befelt over larger areas than earthquakes of similar strength in theWest.
Although the annual average death toll for earthquakes is about10,000, in 1987 only 1,100 lives were lost.
