-----------------------------------------------Monday
3647.90    +   04.47Tuesday        3640.07    -   07.83Wednesday      3663.55    +
23.48Thursday       3662.43    -   01.12Friday         3684.51    +   22.08 -----------------------------------------------
Introduction:just try explaining what GATT, the Uruguay Round or Blair House are allabout - but US investors have adopted a sensibly direct approach to theNorth American Free Trade Agreement: if Congress passes the treaty nextweek, it will be good for the economy, good for US companies, good for thestock markets, and good for President Clinton.
Amid all the doubts over the Nafta, one thing is certain, trading on marketsnext week is likely to be hamstrung by uncertainty over Wednesday night'svote, which, like the battle over President Clinton's first budget, will beextremely close.
Investors fear that a rejection of Nafta would have dangerousknock- on effects around the world, depressing share prices in the US, LatinAmerica and eventually Europe, and endangering vital trade negotiations overthe Uruguay Round.
Thus, any reversal in that trend - a return of trade barriers, higherinflation, higher bond yields, - could undermine equity markets that arealready vulnerable to a sharp downward correction because of expensive stockvaluations.
Investors' darkest fear is that a no vote on Nafta would throw such aspanner in the works of world trade that it would lead to a new era ofinternational protectionism, higher inflation and slower world economicgrowth.
Share prices in Mexico rose on Wednesday andThursday, and US stocks made solid gains, following the televised debate onTuesday between Vice-President Al Gore and Ross Perot, who is Nafta's mostcelebrated opponent.
Investors believe that Nafta will liftcorporate profits because in a more open trading environment between thethree signatory countries the US, with its superior industrial productivityrates and better-quality products, will enjoy the greatest economicbenefits.
By coincidence, the day after next week's Nafta vote,Clinton will be in Seattle for a trade conference with leaders of AsianPacific Nations.
Although data released this week on producer andconsumer prices showed that fears of rising inflation are, at least for now,unjustified, equity investors remain nervous about rising bond yields.
Stockmarkets in Mexico and the US, however, believe the chances of success forNafta improved this week.
The result is that the President faces a tough fight ensuring that the Houseof Representatives votes to approve the treaty on Wednesday.
The expectation is that growth in US exports to Mexico and Canadawill outpace growth in imports from its neighbours to the north and south.
Most Wall Streeteconomists are pro-Nafta, as are the majority of business leaders, if recentpolls are to be believed.
There is, however, the dark side of Nafta to consider.
Gore clearly bested Perot in a heated war of words, and polls taken over thenext few days revealed that more Americans had been won over to Nafta.
Anti-Nafta forces have warned that opening uptrade with Mexico will lead to a migration of American jobs south of theborder, where wages are much lower.
As of yesterday, the outcome of the vote was deemed too close to call.
