"Yesterday we had a big party, and today we're fighting,"moaned Bogataj Vejko, a truck driver from near Ljubljana,
whohad safely crossed the border early in the morning and wasnow trying to get back home.
Here, the drama was watched by several Yugoslavstrying to return to their country from Austria; the cooks,waitresses and a few guests at restaurants on both sides ofthe border; several tourists who were caught on the Yugoslavside; and a dozen Austrian customs officers and policemen.
Together, Slovenia, with two million people, and Croatia,with five million, supply nearly two-thirds of Yugoslavia'sforeign exchange and about half of the country's grossnational product.
"Emil Herlec, a leader of the local Slovene mountain rescueteam, scrambled up the mountain, through the woods, when heheard the shooting. "
The Slovenes, about three dozen strong,waved a white sheet from one of the windows, laid down theirweapons and were marched down the road.
Accompanied by tanks, jet fighters,helicopters, the regular troops, including paratroopers,battled Slovene militiamen across the breakaway republic.
They surrounded the airport near Ljubljana, Slovenia'scapital, and retook Slovenia's main border crossings withAustria, Italy and Hungary, effectively cutting offinternational traffic.
Those on the Austrian side gathered near the restaurant'sbeer garden and watched through binoculars as the armysoldiers moved through the forest, and then they scrambledfor cover when shots were fired.
"In Ljubljana, Milan Kucan, Slovenia's president, vowed ina television address that the republic's militia wouldrespond with "all methods" to any aggression against his"independent state."
Politically, the two republics' declarations ofindependence have been ignored by the rest of the world,which supports a united Yugoslavia.
And onTuesday night, after the two republics declared theirindependence, the federal parliament called on the army tointervene.
TheCommunist leadership of Serbia, Yugoslavia's largestrepublic, insists on strong central control from Belgrade,the capital of both Serbia and Yugoslavia.
The first shooting between the federal army and themilitias occurred here, in the mountains that mark the borderwith Austria.
Less than two days after Slovenia and Croatia, two ofYugoslavia's six republics, unilaterally seceded from thenation, the federal government in Belgrade mobilized troopsto regain control.
"After the army established control, Milan Jelen, a Slovenebusinessman, reached into the backseat of his car andretrieved his son's toy slingshot. "
But the poorly trained and equipped Slovene and Croatianmilitias, formed in the past several months, are no match forthe 180,000-strong federal army.
Throughout the morning, federal soldiers, somebearing bazookas, fanned out in the woods surrounding theSlovenia customs house.
Outside the Slovene capital, governmentarmored vehicles smashed through barricades and road blocks,leaving a trail of twisted metal, flattened cars andshattered glass.
Local militiamen shot down a federalarmy helicopter as it flew over the capital, killing thepilot and co-pilot, the Associated Press reported.
In Croatia, the army moved into areas where fightingerupted between Croats and minority Serbs, Yugoslavia's twolargest nationalities and historic rivals.
The independence declarations came after months ofunsuccessful negotiations among the leaders of the sixrepublics over the post-Cold War shape of Yugoslavia.
The scene was like something out of the U.S. Civil War,where civilians gathered for picnics to watch the earlybattles.
have lobbied heavily for the maintainance of theYugoslav state, and have threatened to withhold millions ofdollars in aid if the country breaks up.
The local militias also havenothing to counter the central government's several thousandtanks and other armored vehicles, not to mention thegovernment's air forces.
The federal army, dominated by Serbs, has long warned thatit won't stand by while the country disintegrates.
In a letter to Slovenia's premier, Gen. KonradKolsek of the federal military district that controlsSlovenia said he had orders to seize all border crossings andwould "crush" any resistence.
And they fear losing the economic support ofSlovenia and Croatia, the two wealthiest republics.
The blasts left holes in the roof and walls and shatteredwindows in the house.
