For example, Sen. Byrd and Sen. Ernest Hollings (D., S.C.), chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, have already drawn up legislation that would require small planes to be equipped with altitude-reporting devices at hundreds of airports across the U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D., N.J.), chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Transportation, predicted that the accident will "accelerate movement by the Congress and the Transportation Department to do whatever can be done -- either by hiring more maintenance inspectors or reducing air traffic to meet the capacity of the system, to reduce the chances of future accidents."
Thomas Haueter, of the safety recommendations staff of the safety agency, said that the board hadn't put out an emergency recommendation for immediate replacement of the pins because it was unclear if the problems that had occurred were merely isolated incidents or reflected system problems.
The accident, the second-deadliest ever in the U.S., could have a broad range of effects on the airline industry regardless of the specific causes, aviation specialists said.
According to Associated Press reports, some witnesses to the crash, including an air traffic controller, said they saw blue flame coming from one of the jetliner's engines just before it hit the ground and exploded into a fireball.
The FAA, in a May 29 response, told the board it essentially agreed with its recommendations and would take steps to require inspections of the engine and replacement of parts where necessary.
The FAA said in Washington that air-traffic controllers in Detroit gave the Northwest flight takeoff clearance for Runway 3C, the center of the airport's three runways.
John Lauber, one of five members of the National Transportation Safety Board, said at a news conference at a hotel near the airport last night that there was no evidence at this point that either engine exploded or caught fire during flight.
In April, the National Transportation Safety Board urged the FAA to conduct a safety investigation of the 200 series of JT8D engines after some dangerous in-flight engine failures.
"The left wing hit the ground, and the aircraft burst into flames," according to the controllers' account.
Moreover, although service problems have been the focus of much of the attention in recent months, the debate may now center more strongly on safety issues.
Introduction:The Northwest Airlines jet that crashed Sunday in Detroit, killing at least 154 people, was involved in two incidents of engine failure in the past two years.
Following a summer of near-misses, delays and other snafus, some airline specialists said the accident could serve as a catalyst for a reassessment of the nation's air-travel system.
FAA records show that besides those incidents that involved the plane that crashed, problems with the turbine sections of JT8D-200 series engines occurred on three Republic flights in the past four years.
In Detroit, federal crash inspectors and representatives of United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit, the engine maker, arrived at the accident scene.
According to Federal Aviation Administration records, the McDonnell Douglas Corp. MD-82 jet made emergency landings in 1985 and 1986 following the loss of power in one of its two engines.
An FAA official said all jetliners, in order to be certified, must be capable of completing their takeoff ascent even if one engine fails, provided the aircraft is within prescribed weight limits.
A later inspection showed that all 44 of the pins used to lock jet-engine turbine-vane clusters to the outer part of the turbine case had fractured.
In addition to a large fuel load for the flight to Phoenix, Ariz., the flight was jammed with passengers.
In its April report, the National Transportation Safety Board warned that "many" of the 330 MD-80 series airplanes operated by 12 U.S. and 14 foreign airlines world-wide "are potential candidates" for engine failure.
In others, airlines have made changes, based on a Pratt &amp; Whitney service bulletin, to reduce the risk of pin failure.
The board made the recommendation after a March 23 incident in which an American Airlines MD-82 plane approaching the Minneapolis airport experienced an engine surge and loss of power.
FAA officials at the crash scene wouldn't speculate on the reasons for the crash or comment on the plane's engines.
The engine, a JT8D-217A, was shut down, and the plane landed without further trouble.
The board recommended that the FAA order inspections of the JT8D engines to detect any pin fractures and to replace existing ones with improved pins.
"There is going to be a lot of noise from Capitol Hill," said John Galipault, president of the Aviation Safety Institute.
The controllers reported that shortly after the jetliner lifted off, it pitched from left to right, according to FAA spokesman John Leyden.
In another incident, at the Detroit airport in October 1985, an engine on an MD-82 "popped and began to unspool" on takeoff.
Though federal investigators were looking into a number of possible causes for the crash, which occurred shortly after takeoff, engine failure appeared to be a likely culprit.
The worst airline accident ever in the U.S. was the 1979 crash of an American Airlines jet in Chicago.
The two emergency landings that involved the jetliner, number N312RC, took place in Minneapolis and San Francisco.
The MD-82 jet, which has a good safety record, is designed to be able to take off and land even if one engine fails.
He added, "We will want to hear a thorough examination of everything that took place with that airplane and what was going on at the airport."
The extras included six crew members, two babies who were being held by passengers and two Northwest employees riding on two of the plane's jump seats.
In one such incident, in September 1983, falling debris from an engine caused fire damage to several homes around John Wayne International Airport in Orange County, Calif.
Officials said that the aircraft's flight recorders, which record cockpit conversations, had been found in wreckage that extended over half a mile.
Why the Northwest airliner failed to make the climb and whether it was carrying too much weight will be subjects for federal investigators, he said.
The JT8D-219 engines used on the jet have been the subject of some concern among federal safety officals.
