"The reason we haven't seen a large number of birds affected so far is that the oil is out in the middle of the sound," said Everett Robinson-Wilson, the agency's environmental contaminant coordinator.
Cousins, a three-year employee of Exxon, did not have the Coast Guard certification required to pilot through the sound but was qualified under other circumstances to steer the ship, Iarossi said.
Introduction:
An unqualified mate was piloting the Exxon Valdez -- violating both Coast Guard regulations and company policy -- when the tanker crashed into rocks, unleashing the worst oil spill in U.S. history, Exxon Shipping Co. said Sunday.
There would have been no reason for the 42-year-old captain to go below to use the bathroom or get coffee, since both are available on the bridge, Iarossi said.
She said it might be too perilous to try to capture panicky birds and otters from boats in the frigid water, and there is no road access to the shores where they are likely to show up.
The Coast Guard doesn't have tons and tons of its own equipment, and it would have to hire the same people Exxon has," Nelson said.
Hasn't Seen Plan
"We have been told by Exxon that they will come up with an organized cleanup plan, but we've yet to see one," said Barbara Holian, spokeswoman for the state Department of Environmental Conservation.
The agency is studying its "legal options" and may ask the Coast Guard to take over the cleanup from Exxon, she said.
"Human life and safety is more important," said Pamela Bergmann, the Department of the Interior representative assessing the situation.
Meanwhile, winds kicked up around the crippled ship, stirring fears that choppy waters could destabilize the Exxon Valdez and sweep the slick ashore.
"The Coast Guard may seem slow and plodding at times, but if we file charges, we're going to make them stick," he added.
Nelson said piloting a ship without proper certification is a civil, not criminal, violation, which ultimately could result in suspension or revocation of the captain's license.
Right now, Exxon is the oil company with the deep pockets, and it's cleaning up its own spill within federal guidelines."
Neither Exxon nor the state and federal agencies involved in the operation could say how much oil had been mopped up or what percentage of the slick is contained.
Iarossi said he did not know whether Hazelwood took the wheel after the first accident, or how much time elapsed between the two incidents.
The Coast Guard served subpoenas Saturday on the captain, helmsman and third mate to ensure that they make themselves available to investigators.
Rocks Charted He indicated that the rocks the ship hit were charted and well within range of the Exxon Valdez's navigational equipment.
Wildlife experts were summoned from California to coordinate any efforts to rescue birds and sea otters, whose feathers and fur make them the most vulnerable to oil contamination.
Videotapes filmed by divers revealed 10 sizable holes in the ship's hull, ranging from 8 feet by 15 feet to 20 feet by 6 feet, Iarossi said.
Joseph Hazelwood was one flight below the bridge in his cabin when the Exxon Valdez hit the first jagged rock pinnacle about a mile outside shipping lanes.
A team from the National Transportation Safety Board arrived Sunday to probe the cause of the accident.
Pumps were being used to siphon the remaining oil into a sister tanker Sunday, an operation expected to take up to a week.
So far, oil has washed ashore only on two tiny islands in the sound, and beach cleanup efforts were under way.
Experts from the International Bird Rescue Center in Berkeley, Calif., set up a rehabilitation center here Sunday in case oiled birds are captured.
Still unexplained is why Third Mate Gregory Cousins was steering the 987-foot vessel through the tricky, iceberg-dotted waters on Friday.
Up to $20 Million Damages Iarossi estimated damage to the $125-million ship at $10 million to $20 million.
