The Exxon Valdez, a 987-foot tanker owned by Exxon Shipping Co., rammed the reef about 25 miles from the city of Valdez, the northernmost ice-free port in the United States, at 12:30 a.m.
Coast Guard officers speculated that the ship's captain may have been trying to avoid icebergs from the nearby Columbia Glacier when the accident occurred.
"It's of concern for two reasons: one is the size of the spill and that this is such a sensitive, very productive area," said Lisa Speer, senior staff scientist with the Natural Resources Defense Council in New York.
Fish and Wildlife Service in Anchorage, said the reef ripped a 150-foot gash in the vessel, which was carrying 1.2 million barrels of oil, and there was fear that the tanker could break apart further.
Fish and Wildlife Service said the tanker had been spilling oil at a rate of 10,000 barrels an hour but the Coast Guard said the leak had become a mere trickle by 2:30 p.m., Alaska time.
"It's a gorgeous marine environment and ecosystem, with lots of little islands and inlets and bays," said Emily Barneet, Alaska issues specialist for the Sierra Club in Anchorage.
Another Exxon tanker was attempting to pump the oil out of the crippled vessel, and two Coast Guard investigators were on board the Valdez, he said.
Valdez City Manager Doug Griffen told the Associated Press that the 800-mile trans-Alaska pipeline, which carries oil from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez and the marine terminal, has a good environmental record.
He said employees of the Alyeska Pipeline Service Co., which operates the trans-Alaska oil pipeline for a consortium of oil companies, were getting floating oil booms in place by late afternoon.
U.S. Coast Guard Petty Officer John Gonzales said in a telephone interview from Valdez that the spill was staying "in the mid-channel" and did not seem to be moving toward the shore.
Twenty people were aboard the ship but there were no immediate reports of injuries, said Dave Parish, a spokesman for Exxon USA, in a telephone interview from Anchorage.
Prince William Sound, home to orcas, sea otters and fur seals, is important to both the fishing and the recreation industries.
The spill is expected to add fuel to a campaign by environmentalists to prevent further oil development in Alaska, particularly in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
Introduction:
A Long Beach-bound Exxon oil tanker ran aground on a reef Friday and spilled an estimated 8.4 million gallons of crude oil into Alaska's Prince William Sound, a pristine Pacific waterway heavily used by kayakers, fishermen and tourists.
We saw six sea lions inside the slick, swimming, trying to avoid it, and they had no idea which way to go."
He said three planes from British Columbia, California and England had been dispatched to the scene for aerial spraying to dilute the oil.
Floating Oil Booms Gonzales, the Coast Guard spokesman, said the terminal has cleanup equipment on site for minor spills.
"If it breaks up on the rocks, then anything could happen," he said in a telephone interview.
Cindy Lowry, Alaska regional director for Greenpeace, also complained about the pace of the cleanup.
"It is huge, literally huge," he said in a telephone interview from Cordova.
The immediate response to the spill was handled by crews from the terminal at Valdez.
They are moving way too slowly," said University of Alaska professor Richard Steiner, who flew over the slick Friday.
The problem is that chemical use can have a bad effect on marine life," he said.
But environmentalists feared that if the oil reached the shore, marine birds would be threatened.
Expected Worst "
But this could be a catastrophic occurrence, so we're concerned," he said.
Cowper said that conventional responses, such as booms, probably would not work because the spill is so large. "
"We've been able to brag for a long time that there's never been a major oil spill in Valdez Harbor.
He said that state officials were considering the use of chemicals to disperse and sink the oil. "
You probably couldn't do it (contain the spill) with all the equipment available in North America.
This will affect everything in the food chain, from crab larvae to orca whales."
Infuriated local residents and environmentalists complained about the slow pace of the cleanup.
