Johnson's disgrace was heralded in Canadian headlines such as``Fool's Gold,'' ``
Black Day
For Canada,'' ``Seconds Of Glory,Years Of Shame,'' ``From Fame To Shame,'' and ``Big Ben is NowHas-Ben.''
Trent Frayne, sports columnist for the Globe and Mail ofToronto, said Johnson's victory was the biggest event in Canadasince a national team beat the Soviet Union in a seven-game hockeyseries in 1972.
Some of us don't want to accept whathappened,'' said John Furedy, a psychologist at the University ofToronto, in assessing the mational psyche.
Dr. George Astaphan, Johnson's personal physician, and LarryHeidebrecht, Johnson's agent, insisted the sprinter had not takenstanzolol.
It was unheroic conduct for the world's fastest human, who hadbeen awarded the Order of Canada and a medal from Queen
Elizabethat the Commonwealth Games.
``The only thing we can say is that it is a tragedy, a mistakeor sabotage,'' Heidebrecht said.
``It's like Wayne Gretzky getting run over by a car,'' said PatReid, the Canadian high-jump coach.
The spirit of a nation raced with Johnson when he won the goldmedal in the 100 meters on Saturday with a world record time of9.79 seconds.
Johnson, a 26-year-old Jamaican transplant, waved the Canadianflag in triumph and dedicated his gold to his mother and allCanadian citizens.
``He tarnished the name and reputation of Canada and let itspeople down,'' said the Fredickton Gleaner.
``We all share some of the responsibility in the sense that weput such tremendous pressure on these people,''
Furedy said.
Introduction:
The stripping of Ben Johnson's Olympic gold medalin a drug scandal has wounded Canadian pride and shamed a nationhungry for a hero to replace hockey superstar Wayne Gretzky.
``It's as if an entire country has gone into a period ofnational mourning on his behalf,'' wrote columnist John Robertsonof the Toronto Star.
It's believing theend justifies the means, it's looking for an unfair edge,'' Lautenssaid.
He returned home with a jacket over his head, hurdling a hedgeto duck reporters after flying home from New York in the seclusionof a jet cockpit.
I guess we don't look up to himanymore,'' said Craig Brown, 13, of Toronto.
It's time somebodyreminded us nobody tried to peddle arms for hostages, nobody shotdown a civilian airliner, nobody booby-trapped a home.
The drug scandal brought the same sickening feeling to thenation as did Gretzky's trade to the Los Angeles Kings.
Canada has always tried to escape the influence of the UnitedStates, where its dollar is worth 80 cents.
Then 72 hours later, therewas this roller coaster ride to the bottom,'' Frayne said.
