The requests are for airplanes, helicopters, axes and shovels,portable marine pumps, hoses, fresh fruit, disposable sleepingbags, soft drinks and, most important, manpower.
``The whole place is running at the max, full out,''
Reed Jarvisof the Boise Interagency Fire Center said last week.
``He spellshis name B-L-O-U-G-H.''
Others juggle as many as three of the constantly ringing phones,scanning computer terminals for personnel, airplanes, red chemicalretardant and gear.
On Saturday, there were about 220,000 acres ablaze infour states, with 102,000 of them in Idaho and the rest in Oregon,California and Utah.
Until then, the lights will be on at the FireCenter, and the pace will be frenetic.
In one leg of the L-shaped logistics room, the intelligencedivision keeps track of fires around the country.
``Tell me when the airplane's got to leave
and I'll have theteam on it
,'' coordinator Lynn Findley says into the phone cradledon his shoulder.
He hangs up, makes another call and arranges for a procurementexpert to fly from Atlanta to LaGrande, Ore.
Another staff member fields a caller searching for a fireofficer called ``Joe Blow.''
But this year is different because the center's strategists andquartermasters who direct the nation's wildfire battles can seesome of the worst blazes from their windows.
``Obviously, firefighting on the line is stressful,'' said FireCenter spokesman Arnold Hartigan.
In the logistics center, specialists spin Lazy Susans with pinkand blue requisition forms as each plea from the fire line isanswered.
Magnetsresembling aircraft dot a map of the country, giving the locationand type of equipment available.
As nearly half the acreage afire burns within 150 miles,specialists in the logistics center marshal resources from aroundthe nation.
Introduction:   Lightning has set the West ablaze thissummer, and electricity is again surging through the nation'swildfire command post.
Hundreds of fires burned fitfully in the Idaho backcountry fordays after the last ``lightning bust.''
``It's like Wall Street, it's like an operating room,''
Jarvissays.
``We drop slimy red mud on burning trees from antiqueairplanes,'' declares the slogan on one T-shirt.
Smoke jumpers sit in the shade of a buildingwaiting for their next leap into 100-foot-tall ponderosa pines,laden with chainsaws or water pumps.
Then the craftroar aloft toward the smoky mountains to the north.
After five dry summers, backcountry timber has a moisturecontent only slightly higher than kiln-dried lumber, andstrategists have settled in for a long campaign.
``But the support people aredealing with human life facing fire, which is inherentlydangerous.''
They fill upagain and again with thousands of gallons of ``slurry,'' afertilizer-based substance that stops fires cold.
``We are definitely an assault organization,'' Hartigan said.``It's patterned after military operations because they work.
World War II Navy bombers
_ PB-4Y2s and Neptunes
_ are lined upon the flight deck, spattered with red retardant.
The other findsthe crews and equipment to attack the flames.
