Since states do have the power to amend the Constitution on their own, although it is much harder to do it that way, it could very well be that the groundswell of support for (this) movement in some key industrial states would lead to, not only initiatives in those states to restrict their own state legislative terms, but also .
Instead of worrying about what their constituents think, as it gets toward the end of their term, legislators are going to be worried about what their next employer thinks, possibly in the private sector, or in their next constituency, which will not necessarily share the same interests as the one that elected them.
If there are constant changes, the impact of term limits would be to empower the bureaucracy -- the people who are not elected -- and (they) would definitely empower the special interests who have the finances and the ability to assist the bureaucrats.
There has been a national movement that started in California, 25 years ago, to really strengthen the role of legislatures and to make them co-equal branches of government; things like term limitations, which would restrict the power and authority of legislatures, are a step backward in that movement.
Mark P. Petracca, assistant professor of politics and society, UC Irvine:
The national effect would be very impressive because, unlike Oklahoma (where voters recently approved a 12-year-limit on legislators), which does not have a reputation for being in the vanguard of political change in America, California does.
Robert Presley, state senator (D-Riverside) since 1974, formerly a member of the Riverside County Sheriff's Department for 24 years, 12 of them as undersheriff:
My guess is that in about 20 years, there would be another initiative to change (term limits) because we will have found that (they) didn't work.
Term limits would give the people of California more control over the Legislature, and the Legislature would be less prone to special interests, because legislators would know they are going to be there for six years
and they're out.
Antonia Hernandez, president of the Mexican-American Legal Defense Fund:
The Schabarum initiative (Proposition 140, backed by Los Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum), with a six-year limit (for Assembly members), would have an adverse effect on the Latino community.
Gary C. Jacobson, fellow, Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University; professor of political science, UC San Diego:
The standard argument is that the legislative branch would be weakened.
If you give someone a job, for instance, and tell them that no matter how well they do it, they will be fired, the incentive to do that job well is not there.
Richard L. Mountjoy, member of the state Assembly (R-Monrovia), first elected in 1978, a former general contractor who has served as mayor and city councilman of Monrovia (1968-76):
By 1996, there would be all new faces.
It would mean that, in relative terms, the legislatures would cede more power and authority to the executive branch, to lobbyists and to legislative staff.
They need leaders who have a great deal of experience, skill and ability to lead and to get things done, so that they avoid the kind of stalemate we have had in Congress in recent years.
Karl T. Kurtz, director of state services, National Conference of State Legislatures:
The most negative and pernicious impact of term limitations will be on the leadership of the Legislature .
We are growing at the rate of three-quarters of a million people a year, and that, alone, is hard for people to comprehend.
The first two years you are just finding your way around; the second two you are just hitting your stride, and in the third two years, you are on your way out (if 40 passed).
As to what are the implications of term limitations in the state of California, a lot of people think that this is a partisan issue.
Proposition 131 would limit statewide elected officials to two consecutive four-year terms, state legislators to 12 consecutive years in office; Proposition 140 would hold Assembly members to six years in office, state senators and statewide elected officials to eight.
Because it is the largest political state in the country, a success for either proposition here is likely to have spinoff moves around the country.
And the other thing a lot of people seem to think is that you the governor -- or you the legislator -- can get up there and solve these problems tomorrow.
There is some merit to term limits, but they have to be done in a way that doesn't unduly strengthen the bureaucracy and others who are not elected.
But legislatures also need strong committee chairmen, and term limits mean that relatively inexperienced people are going to be in leadership and that they are -- by definition -- lame ducks from the very beginning.
The argument that the lobbyists would take advantage of them, I believe, is not valid.
people would have to become more dependent on the party for funding and for guidance, and less dependent on the special interests.
It seems that as we (Latinos) begin to make entries into the political process, the rules are beginning to change.
It is the ethnic mix, the cultural diversity -- all of those things have to be cranked in.
It would become clear rather quickly that you have a bunch of elected amateurs trying to run a very complex, complicated system of state government.
Introduction:
Two propositions on California's Nov. 6 ballot would, among other things, limit the terms of statewide officeholders and state legislators.
The Legislature, right now, is controlled by those people who have a vested interest in legislation.
For many members, that's all they've ever done -- be in the Legislature, legislative staff.
The big problem is that nationally -- or locally -- we do not have a culture that encourages and rewards public service for short periods of time.
That is why we created what, in effect, is a professional elite to govern us.
For minorities who do not have a financial base, it is usually extremely hard to raise the money .
I think that what would happen in the Legislature is more expertise coming out of the citizenry.
The lobbyists are there for a very long time, and they become very expert in their fields .
There are a lot of problems with our political process, but this is not the solution.
I think that is true, but what we are overlooking are the perverse incentives we set up.
We should throw the rotten apples out, but not the whole system with it.
I came to the Legislature after eight years on the (Monrovia) City Council.
Would passage of such measures be likely to spur similar legislation in other states, or at the federal level?
I have tried to make the argument that it is not really partisan at all.
